================================================================================
🧠 Query: hello
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
📄 Context Sent to Model:
[1] Healings also helped to identify Jesus as the promised Messiah and Savior. Jesus fulfilled the prophecy of Isaiah 53:4: “Surely he took up [lifted and took away] our infirmities and carried [as a heavy load] our sorrows.” (“Infirmities,” choli, is the same word used of physical sickness and disease in Deuteronomy 28:59,61; 2 Chronicles 16:12; 21:15,18,19; Isaiah 38:9. “Sorrows,” makob, is the same word used of physical pain in Job 33:19.) Matthew, in the account of Jesus’ healing of Peter’s mother-in-law, sees this Isaiah passage fulfilled in the healing ministry of Jesus: “This was to fulfill what was spoken through the prophet Isaiah: ‘He took up our infirmities and carried our diseases’ ” (Matthew 8:17).2  Isaiah also ties the sufferings of the Servant to the provision of salvation, a ministry fulfilled by Jesus (Isaiah 53:5,6). His sufferings were for our sins and lead to our peace with God: “And by his wounds we are healed” (Isaiah 53:5). The Isaiah context and the reference to

[2] ministry fulfilled by Jesus (Isaiah 53:5,6). His sufferings were for our sins and lead to our peace with God: “And by his wounds we are healed” (Isaiah 53:5). The Isaiah context and the reference to it in 1 Peter 2:24,25 emphasize especially the healing or restoration from sin. However, in view of the emphasis on physical sickness in Isaiah 53:4, it is clear that these passages teach that the gospel to be introduced by the Suffering Servant, Jesus, includes healing from both the spiritual and physical effects of the fall of the human race into sin recorded in Genesis 3.  When John the Baptist was imprisoned, he questioned whether Jesus was actually the promised Messiah or just another forerunner like himself. Jesus responded by calling attention to His messianic works that linked miracles and the preaching of the gospel to the poor (Matthew 11:4,5). Again, healing was an important witness, an integral part of the gospel (Isaiah 61:1,2; Luke 4:18; 7:19–23).  Divine healing continued to

[3] and the preaching of the gospel to the poor (Matthew 11:4,5). Again, healing was an important witness, an integral part of the gospel (Isaiah 61:1,2; Luke 4:18; 7:19–23).  Divine healing continued to be an integral part of the gospel through the ministry of the apostles and the Early Church. Jesus sent out the Twelve and the Seventy-two to preach and to heal the sick (Luke 9:2; 10:9). After Pentecost “many wonders and miraculous signs were done by the apostles” (Acts 2:43). Luke wrote the Book of Acts as an extension of the story of what Jesus did and taught, not only through the apostles but through a Church filled with the Holy Spirit (Acts 1:1,8; 2:4).  The working of miracles, including divine healing, was not limited to the apostles. The promise of Jesus was to all believers (John 14:12–14) who would ask in His name (that is, those who recognize His authority and conform themselves to His nature and purposes). God used deacons such as Philip to preach and heal (Acts 8:5–7) and an

[4] who would ask in His name (that is, those who recognize His authority and conform themselves to His nature and purposes). God used deacons such as Philip to preach and heal (Acts 8:5–7) and an otherwise unknown disciple, Ananias, to bring healing to Saul (Paul) (Acts 9:12–18).  The gospel message includes the provision of spiritual gifts through the Holy Spirit to the Church, among which are the gifts of healings (1 Corinthians 12:7). All of these gifts, including that of healing, continue to edify or build up the Church and offer hope to every believer. Moreover, James asserts that healing is a normal aspect of the regular meetings of the Church. Whenever the community of faith is gathered, anyone who is sick may                                                  2 “Infirmities,” astheneia, denotes weakness and is often used to speak of sickness and disease (Luke 5:15; Acts 28:9); “Diseases,” nosos, seems to be used synonymously with astheneia here to indicate physical disease or

[5] denotes weakness and is often used to speak of sickness and disease (Luke 5:15; Acts 28:9); “Diseases,” nosos, seems to be used synonymously with astheneia here to indicate physical disease or illness (see also, Matthew 4:23; 9:35; Luke 7:21; Acts 19:12).

[6] the prevailing materialist model, which explains our existence as the chance outcome of impersonal physical forces, leads to finding the value of life to be relative and incidental.  Our creation in God’s image is at the heart of the biblical injunction against murder: “Whoever sheds the blood of man, by man shall his blood be shed; for in the image of God has God made man” (Genesis 9:6). By placing His mark upon humankind, God clearly established His own authority over human life and holds accountable those who would usurp it.  The intrinsic value of human beings is confirmed by God’s expression of love in the sacrifice of His Son who paid the price for human sin and transgression. God rightly claims ownership of those He has purchased:  “Do you not know that your body is a temple of the Holy Spirit, who is in you, whom you have received from God? You are not your own; you were bought at a price” (1 Corinthians 6:19,20).  Not only does God forbid the claims of others against our

[7] the Holy Spirit, who is in you, whom you have received from God? You are not your own; you were bought at a price” (1 Corinthians 6:19,20).  Not only does God forbid the claims of others against our lives, He also forbids our own claims against our lives. Murder is condemned in the Bible in the severest terms (Genesis 9:6; Deuteronomy 5:17). Suicide, the deliberate killing of one’s self, finds no support in the Bible, and the few cases recorded there imply divine displeasure (1 Samuel 31:4; Matthew 27:5).  Advocates of suicide, by whatever means, must deny these standards and reject this valuation of human life. Specifically, they must contend for personal autonomy over one’s own existence. The argument is as follows:   “I am my own;  The time and means of my dying lie at the heart of my private life;  I therefore retain the ‘right to die’, and no-one may take it from me.”3  This assertion of personal sovereignty holds the promise of freedom but delivers self-destruction.  It

[8] of my private life;  I therefore retain the ‘right to die’, and no-one may take it from me.”3  This assertion of personal sovereignty holds the promise of freedom but delivers self-destruction.  It resonates with the falsity of Satan’s reasoning with Eve: “You will not surely die . . . For God knows that when you eat of it your eyes will be opened, and you will be like God, knowing good and evil” (Genesis 3:4,5). As with any exercise of personal choice outside the parameters of God’s law—abortion, euthanasia, drug abuse, homosexual practices, and heterosexual promiscuity—the invariable consequence is physical and spiritual death.  Conversely, the righteous decision to obey God’s commands brings true freedom. Within the parameters of His law, the individual may anticipate the joy of His blessing. God confronts each of us with the stark alternatives: “This day I call heaven and earth as witnesses against you that I have set before you life and death, blessings and curses. Now choose

[9] blessing. God confronts each of us with the stark alternatives: “This day I call heaven and earth as witnesses against you that I have set before you life and death, blessings and curses. Now choose life, so that you and your children may live and that you may love the Lord your God, listen to his voice, and hold fast to him” (Deuteronomy 30:19,20).

[10] Its human and historical idealization is pictured in an oft-quoted passage from Israel’s “golden age”:  “During Solomon's lifetime Judah and Israel, from Dan to Beersheba, lived in safety (betach), everyone under their own vine and under their own fig tree” (1 Kings 4:25).  But as the biblical record makes clear, Solomon’s splendid and affluent kingdom by no means perfectly represented the mature shalom into which Israel’s God desired to bring His ancient covenant people and indeed all humankind (Micah 4:4).  Though the people whom God created were all too soon and too willingly alienated, the promise of a final and perfect realization of shalom is nonetheless found throughout the Scriptures.  Immediately following the Fall of our first parents is God’s promise that the seed of the woman would one day defeat the deceiver (Genesis 3:15).  This promise is followed by God’s promise to Abraham and his descendents that “all peoples on earth will be blessed through you” (Genesis 12:3).

[11] would one day defeat the deceiver (Genesis 3:15).  This promise is followed by God’s promise to Abraham and his descendents that “all peoples on earth will be blessed through you” (Genesis 12:3).  Somewhat later God promises that the Messiah, a descendant of David, will come to establish a kingdom of peace throughout the earth (2 Samuel 7:12–13; 1 Kings 8:20; 1 Chronicles 17:11–14; Isaiah 9:6–7; 11:10–16).  These conditions are beautifully and powerfully depicted in the Old Testament prophets as a time when nations will no longer war against one another (Isaiah 2:4) and all creation is at peace (Isaiah 32:17–18).  God’s people will then finally have entered into the perfect shalom He intended from the beginning.  With righteousness he [the Branch, i.e., the Messiah] will judge the needy, with justice he will give decisions for the poor of the earth. He will strike the earth with the rod of his mouth; with the breath of his lips he will slay the wicked. Righteousness will be his belt

[12] with justice he will give decisions for the poor of the earth. He will strike the earth with the rod of his mouth; with the breath of his lips he will slay the wicked. Righteousness will be his belt and faithfulness the sash around his waist. The wolf will live with the lamb, the leopard will lie down with the goat, the calf and the lion and the yearling together; and a little child will lead them. The cow will feed with the bear, their young will lie down together, and the lion will eat straw like the ox. The infant will play near the cobra’s den, and the young child will put its hand into the viper’s nest. They will neither harm nor destroy on all my holy mountain, for the earth will be filled with the knowledge of the LORD as the waters cover the sea (Isaiah 11:4–9).  The New Testament continues this theme, often reflecting the language of the Old Testament prophets, and likewise declares that God’s eternal kingdom (Psalm 145:13) of peace will be established on the earth.  But it

[13] continues this theme, often reflecting the language of the Old Testament prophets, and likewise declares that God’s eternal kingdom (Psalm 145:13) of peace will be established on the earth.  But it will only come at the end of this present age when Jesus Christ returns as “King of kings and Lord of lords” (Revelation 19:11–16).  The Revelation vividly depicts the arrival of a millennium, a thousand-year reign of peace (Revelation 20:4–10) which then gives way to the new heaven and the new earth (Revelation 21).  It also describes the descent of the City of God at which time God comes eternally to dwell in righteousness and peace with His people (Revelation 21:1 through 22:5).   “Look!  God's dwelling place is now among the people, and he will dwell with them.  They will be his people, and God himself will be with them and be their God.  ‘He will wipe every tear from their eyes.  There will be no more death’

[14] The Problem of Gambling  The prevalence of gambling has increased as a result of its accelerated legalization3, enhanced media exposure through mega-lotteries, expanded accessibility through online gaming and state-sanctioned lotteries, perceived acceptability of “gaming” as healthy social activity and recreational entertainment, and professed claims of economic benefit through job creation. Nonetheless, gambling’s troublesome consequences, both individual and societal, remain.  For many persons gambling results in psychological addiction4 that mirrors other forms of addiction, such as alcohol and drug dependence, in terms of symptoms5 and variation in brain chemistry.6 Gambling’s threat to public health is understood in terms of its susceptibility to organized criminal influence and control, as well as its detrimental impact on society in terms of marital dissolutions7, impoverished families, bankruptcies, suicides8 and costs of associated social services, such as treating addictions

[15] as well as its detrimental impact on society in terms of marital dissolutions7, impoverished families, bankruptcies, suicides8 and costs of associated social services, such as treating addictions and responding to increased crime.  In the social sciences, the term “gambling disorders” incorporates both “problem gambling” and “pathological gambling,”9 the latter being the more severe and subject to clinical diagnosis. Researchers spanning three decades estimate that from slightly less than 1 percent up to 1.9 percent of the U. S. general population suffers from pathological gambling.10 In a meta-analysis of 120 previous studies, researchers at the Center for Addictions at Harvard Medical School found that approximately 1.1 percent of the adult general population were past-year level three [pathological] gamblers and an additional 2.8 percent were classified as level 2 [problematic] gamblers who were having some problems as a result of their gambling but did not meet diagnostic criteria

[16] gamblers and an additional 2.8 percent were classified as level 2 [problematic] gamblers who were having some problems as a result of their gambling but did not meet diagnostic criteria as pathological.11 This research suggests that almost 4 percent of the adult population in the United States suffers from some form of gambling disorder. Of the pathological gamblers, approximately 75 percent have an alcohol use disorder and 38 percent also

[17] 3 Especially since passage of the federal Indian Gaming Regulatory Act of 1988. 4 This is illustrated classically in Fyodor Dostoevsky’s The Gambler, 1867. Originally published in Russian, it is available in many English translations and in online free editions. See also Howard J. Shaffer, “Understanding the Means and Objects of Addiction: Technology, the Internet, and Gambling.” Journal of Gambling Studies 12:4 (1996): 461–469. 5 This includes increasing tolerance (e.g., needs to gamble more money to achieve the desired excitement); symptoms of withdrawal if gambling is stopped or reduced; and an inability to stop or reduce gambling. 6 John Mangels, “Gambling Addicts Arise from Mix of Flawed Thinking, Brain Chemistry and Habitual Behavior,” The Plain Dealer, May 15, 2011. http://blog.cleveland.com/metro/2011/05/gambling_addicts_arise_from_mi.html  accessed March 12, 2013. 7 “It is estimated that one problem gambler affects at least

[18] The Plain Dealer, May 15, 2011. http://blog.cleveland.com/metro/2011/05/gambling_addicts_arise_from_mi.html  accessed March 12, 2013. 7 “It is estimated that one problem gambler affects at least seven other people—spouses, children, extended family members, and friends. Problem gambling can hurt not only one’s finances, but one’s physical and mental health, as well as relationships.” AAMFT Therapy Topics, American Association for Marital and Family Therapy. http://www.aamft.org/imis15/Content/Consumer_Updates/Problem_Gambling.aspx  accessed March 12, 2013. 8 Alex Blaszczynski and E. Farrell, “A Case Series of 44 Completed Gambling Related Suicides.” Journal of Gambling Studies, 14 (1998): 93–110. 9The diagnosis of “pathological gambling” was added to the American Psychiatric Association’s Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders in 1980. 10 Christine Reilly, “The Prevalence of Gambling Disorders in the United States: Three Decades of Evidence” in Increasing the Odds, Vol.

[19] Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders in 1980. 10 Christine Reilly, “The Prevalence of Gambling Disorders in the United States: Three Decades of Evidence” in Increasing the Odds, Vol. 3, Gambling and the Public Health, Part 1, 2009. http://www.ncrg.org/sites/default/files/uploads/docs/monographs/ncrg_monograph_vol3.pdf accessed March 9, 2013. 11 Ibid., 4. Reilly cites a 1997 study by Shaffer, Hall & Vander Bilt. Research supported by a grant from the National Center for Responsible Gaming.

[20] request prayer for healing (5:14). We are assured that divine healing is an ongoing manifestation of the gospel in the current day, and will continue until the return of Jesus. II. Divine Healing Is Provided in the Atonement The ministry of the priests under the Law foreshadowed the ministry of the great High Priest, Jesus Christ, who is able “to sympathize with our weaknesses (astheneia, weakness, sickness, disease, timidity, infirmity)” (Hebrews 4:14,15). The Old Testament priests, through the sprinkling of the blood of the sacrifices, made atonement for the sins of the people.  An examination of the concept of atonement in the Bible shows that in most cases it refers to a ransom price paid for redemption and restoration, which points to the redemption through Christ accomplished by the shedding of His blood in our behalf. The apostle Paul described it this way: “God presented him as a sacrifice of atonement, through faith in his blood” (Romans 3:25).  The phrase, “sacrifice of

[21] the shedding of His blood in our behalf. The apostle Paul described it this way: “God presented him as a sacrifice of atonement, through faith in his blood” (Romans 3:25).  The phrase, “sacrifice of atonement,” translates the Greek hilastērion, which can be also translated expiation, propitiation, atonement, or mercy seat. Leviticus 16 records God’s expectations for Israel’s Day of Atonement and the ministry of the high priest sprinkling the blood of a sin offering on the atonement cover (the solid gold lid on top of the ark of the covenant). The ark contained the stone tablets of the Law, which the people had broken. The broken Law called for judgment and death. But when the blood of a spotless lamb was sprinkled, prophetically anticipating the sinless life of Christ, God saw that sinless life instead of the broken Law and could give mercy and blessing.  The primary purpose of the atonement was cleansing from sin (Leviticus 16:30). It is also clear, however, that atonement brought

[22] life instead of the broken Law and could give mercy and blessing.  The primary purpose of the atonement was cleansing from sin (Leviticus 16:30). It is also clear, however, that atonement brought release from the penalty and consequences of sin in order to bring restoration to God’s blessing and favor. When the people of Israel complained after the judgment that followed the rebellion of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, God sent a plague on the Israelites. Moses sent Aaron out into the midst of the congregation, where he made atonement for them, and the plague was stopped (Numbers 16:47,48). The Law of Moses required that when the men of Israel were numbered, they were each to give a half shekel atonement offering for their redemption and to prevent a plague from coming upon them (Exodus 30:11–16). Atonement thus provided cleansing from sin and its consequences, including sickness and disease.  The Bible makes it clear that people could not pay the price for their redemption, so God out of

[23] Atonement thus provided cleansing from sin and its consequences, including sickness and disease.  The Bible makes it clear that people could not pay the price for their redemption, so God out of His love and for the glory of His own name provided the ultimate atonement (Romans 3:25; see also Psalms 65:3; 78:38; 79:9; Romans 3:21–28). All this was accomplished through Christ at Calvary (John 3:14–16). There He made a full atonement for the whole person. The New Testament speaks of this as redemption, which has essentially the same meaning as atonement. Through Christ we have received redemption and the forgiveness of sins (Romans 3:24; Ephesians 1:7; Colossians 1:14; Hebrews 9:15).

[24] The Boundaries of Life God determines the boundaries of life and holds in His hands the two fragile ends of human experience. He is active in the conception of life and the conclusion of life, in birth and in death.  Of his beginning, the Psalmist writes, “For you created my inmost being; you knit me together in my mother’s womb. . . . My frame was not hidden from you when I was made in the secret place” (Psalm 139:13,15). The womb is the place of God’s creative handiwork. It is there each life is endowed with unique personality, unique physical traits, and a unique spiritual nature. The glimpses we have seen of this work through the eyes of biomedical advance only intensify our awe at God’s techniques. We may be less discerning, on the other hand, of God’s activity in the final moments of death. We naturally shrink from death and view it as an adversary reluctantly yielding, in the end, to its inexorable demand upon us.  Of course, death was not God’s ideal. Death was introduced by

[25] of death. We naturally shrink from death and view it as an adversary reluctantly yielding, in the end, to its inexorable demand upon us.  Of course, death was not God’s ideal. Death was introduced by rebellion and subsequently spread from one man to the entire race: “Therefore, just as sin entered the world through one man, and death through sin . . . in this way death came to all men, because all sinned” (Romans 5:12). God’s plan is to deliver us from this last enemy. “ ‘Where, O death, is your victory? Where, O death, is your sting?’ The sting of death is sin, and the power of sin is the law. But thanks be to God! He gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ” (1 Corinthians 15:55–57).  For the believer, death is not a final defeat but a transition in which the perishable is exchanged for the imperishable, the temporal for the eternal, the imperfect for the perfect. The believer experiences assurance even when facing death. Job concludes, “You will call and I will answer

[26] exchanged for the imperishable, the temporal for the eternal, the imperfect for the perfect. The believer experiences assurance even when facing death. Job concludes, “You will call and I will answer you; you will long for the creature your hands have made” (Job 14:15). The Psalmist implies the symmetry of God’s activity in his birth and death when he writes, “All the days ordained for me were written in your book before one of them came to be” (Psalm 139:16).  If life’s beginning at conception and life’s end at death are in God’s hands, both abortion and suicide, assisted or otherwise, represent violations of His prerogative. Abortion steals from the womb a life yet to be started; suicide hastens to the grave a life yet to be completed.  The argument for suicide also ignores the profound spiritual implications of the transition from life to death. Its proponents and practitioners offer no insights into the spiritual reality beyond the grave. There is no acknowledgment of mortality or

[27] spiritual implications of the transition from life to death. Its proponents and practitioners offer no insights into the spiritual reality beyond the grave. There is no acknowledgment of mortality or final judgment. This apparent naiveté is indicative of the spiritual deception underlying the right-to-die philosophy. The Meaning of Suffering Our difficulty in understanding God’s activity in death is matched only by our difficulty understanding His activity in human suffering. From the biblical perspective, however, suffering is potentially purposeful and refining. From the perspective of the proponents of

[28] or mourning or crying or pain, for the old order of things has passed away.” (Revelation 21:3–4)  Present Need for Peacemaking  Unfortunately, from the fall of Adam and Eve until the present, peace on our fallen planet has continued to be fragile indeed.  Human history, to be sure, has its finer moments with the emergence of lofty ideals, many realized extensively in the history of our own and other nations, past and present.  But unfortunately human history is also littered with the memories of wars, tyrannical and corrupt regimes, lawlessness, murder, slavery, even genocide.  Far from our having evolved into a kinder, gentler world, the dawning of the twenty-first century is brimming with a simmering mix of ancient barbarities, militant religions, and godless philosophies that seem perennially to threaten whatever moral progress has been accomplished in previous generations.  Moral turbulence notwithstanding and with all the more reason, the Scriptures reiterate again and again the

[29] to threaten whatever moral progress has been accomplished in previous generations.  Moral turbulence notwithstanding and with all the more reason, the Scriptures reiterate again and again the imperative of peacemaking for every generation.  Dark ages and dark days are no reason for followers of Christ to cease faithful representation of the Prince of Peace!  Even so, with all realism, the New Testament anticipates that turmoil will continue, and indeed increase as the end of the age approaches.  In 2 Timothy 3:1–5, Paul predicts “terrible times” that will characterize many of the “last days.”  Among his descriptors of human depravity are such terms as “lovers of themselves (selfish),” “unforgiving,” and “treacherous,” all of which specifically identify characteristics that militate against peace and justice and often corrupt humankind’s best intended efforts toward those ends.  The Church in our time, and every time, has both the imperative and the challenge of pursuing peace and

[30] peace and justice and often corrupt humankind’s best intended efforts toward those ends.  The Church in our time, and every time, has both the imperative and the challenge of pursuing peace and justice in societies often tumultuous and conflicted.  Great revivals of Christian faith and morals have often turned the tide of human history, and that possibility is always with those who believe and act on their faith.  Biblical Directives for Peacemaking  The Scriptures are replete with directives to make peace in the midst of injustice and turmoil.  The Psalmist proclaims:  “Turn from evil and do good; seek peace and pursue it” (Psalm 34:14).  The great writing prophets of the Old Testament severely condemned the dreadful social exploitation and injustice of the kingdoms of Israel and Judah in their prosperous but declining years.  Thus Amos confronted an outwardly religious but idolatrous and oppressive Israel:  Away with the noise of your songs! I will not listen to the music of your

[31] in their prosperous but declining years.  Thus Amos confronted an outwardly religious but idolatrous and oppressive Israel:  Away with the noise of your songs! I will not listen to the music of your harps. But let justice roll on like a river,  righteousness like a never-failing stream! (5:23–24).  Similarly, Isaiah shortly thereafter confronted Judah, also outwardly religious but publicly corrupted by injustice and idolatry:  Stop doing wrong. Learn to do right; seek justice. Defend the oppressed. Take up the cause of the fatherless; plead the case of the widow (1:16–17).

[32] have a drug use disorder.12 Sadly, more recent research conducted by the Research Institute on Addictions at the University of Buffalo indicates that 6.5 percent of young people (ages 14–21) are at-risk and problem gamblers (mostly male), a rate much higher than the general adult population.13  Those who think they may escape the problems by avoiding some types of gambling while participating in seemingly more innocuous forms should consider the conclusion of university researchers funded by the gambling industry itself:  “Research does not substantiate the belief that some games—such as online poker or slot machines—are riskier than others. People can get into trouble with all types of gambling, from sports betting to the lottery, from bingo to casino games.”14 This should serve as a warning even to many good and relatively psychologically healthy people, including Christians, who “have been ‘softened’ toward frequent gambling by the permissive attitudes of family or friends, and by

[33] even to many good and relatively psychologically healthy people, including Christians, who “have been ‘softened’ toward frequent gambling by the permissive attitudes of family or friends, and by favorable portrayals of betting in popular culture. They start gambling for entertainment, or to be sociable. . . . From that point, the conditioning process takes over, forging a connection in the brain between winning and feeling good.”15  While all levels of society may be adversely affected by gambling, repeated studies have shown that the poor are particularly susceptible to the inducements of the industry, and are deliberately targeted.16 State-sponsored lotteries likewise generate much of their revenue from the less affluent who are often desperate for a solution to their financial ills and more easily drawn in by lottery advertising.17 That those at or near the poverty level spend a greater percentage of their income on various gambling venues is well documented. One recent study by a

[34] more easily drawn in by lottery advertising.17 That those at or near the poverty level spend a greater percentage of their income on various gambling venues is well documented. One recent study by a major university institute found that problem gambling was twice as common in “disadvantaged” neighborhoods as the more affluent. Moreover, the poorest in these disadvantaged neighborhoods were the ones at greatest risk for gambling problems.18  Given these problematic effects of gambling upon individuals, governmental reliance upon state-sanctioned gambling to fund its legitimate activities such as education is deplorable. Furthermore, marketing and promotion of state-sanctioned gambling—which amounts to a tax (though voluntary) upon those in society who can least afford to pay the monetary and social penalties accompanying such gambling—is especially egregious.

[35] 12 Ibid., 5. Reilly cites a 2005 study by Petry, Stinson & Grant, University of Connecticut Health Center and National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, 2005. 13 John W. Welte, Grace M. Barnes, Marie-Cecile O. Tidwell & Joseph H. Hoffman, “The Prevalence of Problem Gambling Among U.S. Adolescents and Young Adults: Results from a National Survey.” Journal of Gambling Studies 24:2 (2008): 119-133. 14 National Center for Responsible Gaming, Fact Sheet on Gambling Disorders, http://www.collegegambling.org/just-facts/gambling-disorders accessed March 9, 2013. 15 John Mangels, “Gambling Addicts Arise from Mix of Flawed Thinking, Brain Chemistry and Habitual Behavior,” The Plain Dealer, May 15, 2011. http://blog.cleveland.com/metro/2011/05/gambling_addicts_arise_from_mi.html  accessed March 12, 2013. 16 http://opinionator.blogs.nytimes.com/2014/06/21/gaming-the-poor  accessed November 25, 2014. 17

[36] accessed March 12, 2013. 16 http://opinionator.blogs.nytimes.com/2014/06/21/gaming-the-poor  accessed November 25, 2014. 17 http://www.npr.org/2014/07/16/332015825/lotteries-take-in-billions-often-attract-the-poor, accessed November 26, 2014. 18 http://www.buffalo.edu/news/releases/2014/01/001.html, accessed November 25, 2014.
================================================================================

================================================================================
🧠 Query: User: hello
Assistant: Hello! My main purpose here is to answer information questions from the file base. If you have any questions about topics such as healing, the gospel, or the implications of life and death, feel free to ask!

User: tell me what I just asked you
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
📄 Context Sent to Model:
[1] 1 
WOMEN IN MINISTERIAL LEADERSHIP 
(Adopted by the General Presbytery in session August 4–5, 2025) 
 
 
Summary 
 
The Bible provides numerous examples of women serving in a variety of ministries. Their 
work includes both speaking and leading among God’s people. And since the birth of the 
Assemblies of God, women gifted by the Holy Spirit have served as pastors, missionaries, 
teachers, and evangelists. The Assemblies of God recognizes the spiritual gifting of 
women in all aspects and levels of church ministry as revealed in the Scriptures. 
 
Introduction 
 
The Assemblies of God was founded with a powerful experience of the s upernatural 
manifestations and gifts of the Holy Spirit. Pentecostals believe that the outpouring of the 
Spirit in the early twentieth century continues the fulfillment of the prophecy, “Your sons 
and daughters will prophesy. . . . In those days I will pour out my Spirit even on servants—
men and women alike” (Joel 2:28–29; cf. Acts 2:16–18).

[2] and daughters will prophesy. . . . In those days I will pour out my Spirit even on servants—
men and women alike” (Joel 2:28–29; cf. Acts 2:16–18).
1 Joel’s prophecy demonstrates 
the inclusion of women in the ministries of the new covenant age. 
 
Since the earliest days of the Fellowship, spiritual gifting has been clear in the ministries 
of women. O utstanding female ministers  pioneered and directed a broad spectrum of 
ministries. Some of those ministered in partnership with their  husbands. At times , 
husbands worked secular jobs  to support the active ministries of their wives. In other 
cases, women chose to forego marriage to better fulfill the ministries to which the Lord 
had called them. Brave women served locally and abroad as missionaries, evangelists, 
church planters, pastors, educators, and in other roles. 
 
The Bible as Final Authority 
 
The history and practice of the Assemblies of God show  that God blesses the public

[3] church planters, pastors, educators, and in other roles. 
 
The Bible as Final Authority 
 
The history and practice of the Assemblies of God show  that God blesses the public 
ministry of women. Yet, debate continues about  the proper role of women in spiritual 
leadership. Since the Bible is our final authority in all matters of faith and practice, we 
must ensure that our stance is founded on Scripture.  What the Bible says should be 
explored as carefully and objectively as possible, using established rules of exegesis and 
interpretation. This paper gives both historical and theological guidance. It also evaluates 
the usual texts used to limit or deny the ministry of women.  
 
Exploring a text ’s original culture and context  is needed to grasp its meaning. For 
instance, 1 Corinthians 7:1 starts with “ Now regarding the questions you asked in your

[4] Exploring a text ’s original culture and context  is needed to grasp its meaning. For 
instance, 1 Corinthians 7:1 starts with “ Now regarding the questions you asked in your 
 
1 Unless otherwise indicated, all Scripture quotations are taken from the Holy Bible, New Living Translation, copyright © 1996, 2004, 
2015 by Tyndale House Foundation. Used by permission of Tyndale House Publishers, Carol Stream, Illinois 60188. All rights 
reserved.

[5] Divine Healing  (Adopted by the General Presbytery in session August 9-11, 2010)   From its inception the General Council of the Assemblies of God has recognized divine healing for the whole person as an important part of the gospel, the good news, which Jesus commissioned His disciples to proclaim. The Assemblies of God constitution in its Statement of Fundamental Truths, section 12, states, “Divine healing is an integral part of the gospel. Deliverance from sickness is provided for in the Atonement, and is the privilege of all believers (Isaiah 53:4,5; Matthew 8:16,17; James 5:14–16).”1  Though it is impossible in a brief paper to cover all the implications of this statement or answer all the questions that are raised concerning it, we shall attempt to show that the statement is scripturally sound. I. Divine Healing Is an Integral Part of the Gospel The ministry of both Jesus and the apostles gives evidence that divine healing was integral to the proclamation of the gospel message.

[6] sound. I. Divine Healing Is an Integral Part of the Gospel The ministry of both Jesus and the apostles gives evidence that divine healing was integral to the proclamation of the gospel message. It was an important witness to Jesus as the revelation of the Father, the promised Messiah, and the Savior from sin (see John 10:37,38). The Bible shows a close connection between the healing ministry of Jesus and His saving, forgiving ministry. His power to heal was actually a witness to His authority to forgive sins (Mark 2:5–12). Frequently the gospel writers testify that His healing miracles parallel His preaching of the gospel, both being the purpose of His ministry (Matthew 4:23; 9:35,36).  People came from all directions both to hear Him and to be healed (Luke 5:15; 6:17,18). He never turned any away but healed all varieties of sicknesses, diseases, deformities, defects, and injuries (Matthew 15:30,31; 21:14). He also delivered people from demons and the problems they caused (Matthew

[7] any away but healed all varieties of sicknesses, diseases, deformities, defects, and injuries (Matthew 15:30,31; 21:14). He also delivered people from demons and the problems they caused (Matthew 4:24).  Jesus recognized that sickness is ultimately the result of the fall of humans into sin, and in some instances may be linked to specific sin (John 5:14) or to the activity of Satan (Luke 13:16). He recognized also, however, that sickness is not always the direct result of specific sin (John 9:2,3). There were times when it was rather an opportunity for God to be glorified (Mark 2:12).  Miracles of healing were an important part of the works God sent Jesus to do (John 9:3,4). This is in line with the Old Testament revelation of God as the Great Physician, the Lord who heals (Exodus 15:26; Psalm 103:3, where the Hebrew participles used in both cases indicate it is God’s nature to heal). Jesus’ ministry showed that divine healing is still a vital part of God’s nature and plan.

[8] 103:3, where the Hebrew participles used in both cases indicate it is God’s nature to heal). Jesus’ ministry showed that divine healing is still a vital part of God’s nature and plan.                                                   1All biblical quotations, unless otherwise indicated, are from the New International Version (NIV).

[9] who would ask in His name (that is, those who recognize His authority and conform themselves to His nature and purposes). God used deacons such as Philip to preach and heal (Acts 8:5–7) and an otherwise unknown disciple, Ananias, to bring healing to Saul (Paul) (Acts 9:12–18).  The gospel message includes the provision of spiritual gifts through the Holy Spirit to the Church, among which are the gifts of healings (1 Corinthians 12:7). All of these gifts, including that of healing, continue to edify or build up the Church and offer hope to every believer. Moreover, James asserts that healing is a normal aspect of the regular meetings of the Church. Whenever the community of faith is gathered, anyone who is sick may                                                  2 “Infirmities,” astheneia, denotes weakness and is often used to speak of sickness and disease (Luke 5:15; Acts 28:9); “Diseases,” nosos, seems to be used synonymously with astheneia here to indicate physical disease or

[10] 2 
letter.” That phrase, “ now regarding,” was repeated by Paul as he answer ed questions 
the Corinthians asked. First Corinthians holds some of Paul’s answers, but it only reveals 
fragments of the Corinthians’ questions. A deeper study of the letter will reconstruct the 
questions they asked.  
 
For Paul’s letters to Timothy, the situation in Ephesus must be understood. Acts 19:8–41 
is one key to understanding. It reveals that magic and the worship of Artemis are parts of 
that situation. Also, Paul told the men in Ephesus to stop arguing during prayer (1 Timothy 
2:8). The Bible includes no other account of Paul giving similar instructions. This was 
likely a problem specific to the Ephesian church . The task of grasping the meaning of  
Scripture requires careful discernment. The reader must discern  between timeless 
theological principles and advice meant for an audience in their unique context. 
 
Some Christian groups disagree  on how certain passages of Scripture should be

[11] 3 
witnesses of the resurrection of Christ. They were instructed to share this great news with 
the disciples (Matthew 28:1–8). 
 
The New Testament shows that women filled important ministry roles after the Day of 
Pentecost as well. Tabitha (Dorcas) started a benevolence ministry (Acts 9:36). One of 
the early house churches met at the home of Lydia (Acts 16:14– 15, 40). Her home also 
seems to have become a base for the Philippian church.  
 
A number of women are named as ministry colleagues.  Paul named two women in 
Philippi, Euodia and Syntyche, as women who “ have contended at my side in the cause 
of the gospel” (Philippians 4:2–3, NIV). In Romans 16, Paul greeted both male and female 
ministry colleagues using the word kopiaō. This term noted the “work” or “labor” of Mary, 
Tryphena, Tryphosa, and Persis (Romans 16:6, 12). Elsewhere, Paul uses kopiaō for the 
labor of ministry (1 Corinthians 16:16; 1 Thessalonians 5:12; 1 Timothy 5:17).

[12] Tryphena, Tryphosa, and Persis (Romans 16:6, 12). Elsewhere, Paul uses kopiaō for the 
labor of ministry (1 Corinthians 16:16; 1 Thessalonians 5:12; 1 Timothy 5:17). 
 
Priscilla is another of Paul’s “co-workers in Christ Jesus” (Romans 16:3–4, NIV). She is 
named with her husband, Aquila, as a teacher of Apollos. The couple “took him aside and 
explained the way of God even more accurately ” (Acts 18:26). Acts also makes it clear 
that Apollos had a strong ministry  of “proving from the Scriptures that Jesus was the 
Messiah” (Acts 1 8:24–28, NIV ). When the ministry team of Priscilla and Aquila  is 
mentioned, she is named first when the names are paired together. This reveals that she 
had the leading role in correcting and instructing this recognized male leader. 
 
Women were active in prophecy in the E arly Church. The Bible points out that Philip ’s 
four unmarried daughters were prophets (Acts 21:8 –9). First Corinthians 11:2 –16 also

[13] Women were active in prophecy in the E arly Church. The Bible points out that Philip ’s 
four unmarried daughters were prophets (Acts 21:8 –9). First Corinthians 11:2 –16 also 
reveals that the men and women of the church were praying and prophesying.  
 
Women were also named as deacons. Phoebe, a leader in the church at Cenchrea, is 
highly commended to the church at Rome by Paul (Romans 16:1– 2). Unfortunately, 
translation biases have obscured Phoebe’s leadership position, calling her just a “servant” 
(KJV, NASB, ESV). Yet Phoebe was diakonos of the church at Cenchrea. Paul regularly 
uses this term for a minister or leader of a church. He also applied it to Jesus Christ, 
Tychicus, Epaphras, Timothy, and his own ministry.  
 
Based on the context, diakonos tends to be translated as “deacon” or “minister.” Some 
translators choose the word “deaconess” (e.g., RSV) despite diakonos being a masculine

[14] Based on the context, diakonos tends to be translated as “deacon” or “minister.” Some 
translators choose the word “deaconess” (e.g., RSV) despite diakonos being a masculine 
noun. So, it seems that diakonos is the title for an official leadership position in the Early 
Church. And the proper translation for Phoebe’ s role is “ deacon” (NIV, NLT, NRSV) or 
“minister.” Also, some translations reveal a bias by referring to Phoebe as being “helpful” 
(NLT) or a “helper” (NASB) of others , including Paul (Romans 16:2).  Based on new 
analysis of ancient Greek manuscripts, Phoebe is called either a prostatis or prostatēs by 
Paul. Both terms are leadership titles.  
 
A final, key example is Paul identifying Junia as an apostle (Romans 16:7). Beginning in 
the thirteenth century, some scholars and translators masculinized her name to Junias. It 
seems they were unwilling to admit that there was a female apostle. The name Junia is

[15] request prayer for healing (5:14). We are assured that divine healing is an ongoing manifestation of the gospel in the current day, and will continue until the return of Jesus. II. Divine Healing Is Provided in the Atonement The ministry of the priests under the Law foreshadowed the ministry of the great High Priest, Jesus Christ, who is able “to sympathize with our weaknesses (astheneia, weakness, sickness, disease, timidity, infirmity)” (Hebrews 4:14,15). The Old Testament priests, through the sprinkling of the blood of the sacrifices, made atonement for the sins of the people.  An examination of the concept of atonement in the Bible shows that in most cases it refers to a ransom price paid for redemption and restoration, which points to the redemption through Christ accomplished by the shedding of His blood in our behalf. The apostle Paul described it this way: “God presented him as a sacrifice of atonement, through faith in his blood” (Romans 3:25).  The phrase, “sacrifice of

[16] the shedding of His blood in our behalf. The apostle Paul described it this way: “God presented him as a sacrifice of atonement, through faith in his blood” (Romans 3:25).  The phrase, “sacrifice of atonement,” translates the Greek hilastērion, which can be also translated expiation, propitiation, atonement, or mercy seat. Leviticus 16 records God’s expectations for Israel’s Day of Atonement and the ministry of the high priest sprinkling the blood of a sin offering on the atonement cover (the solid gold lid on top of the ark of the covenant). The ark contained the stone tablets of the Law, which the people had broken. The broken Law called for judgment and death. But when the blood of a spotless lamb was sprinkled, prophetically anticipating the sinless life of Christ, God saw that sinless life instead of the broken Law and could give mercy and blessing.  The primary purpose of the atonement was cleansing from sin (Leviticus 16:30). It is also clear, however, that atonement brought

[17] life instead of the broken Law and could give mercy and blessing.  The primary purpose of the atonement was cleansing from sin (Leviticus 16:30). It is also clear, however, that atonement brought release from the penalty and consequences of sin in order to bring restoration to God’s blessing and favor. When the people of Israel complained after the judgment that followed the rebellion of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, God sent a plague on the Israelites. Moses sent Aaron out into the midst of the congregation, where he made atonement for them, and the plague was stopped (Numbers 16:47,48). The Law of Moses required that when the men of Israel were numbered, they were each to give a half shekel atonement offering for their redemption and to prevent a plague from coming upon them (Exodus 30:11–16). Atonement thus provided cleansing from sin and its consequences, including sickness and disease.  The Bible makes it clear that people could not pay the price for their redemption, so God out of

[18] Atonement thus provided cleansing from sin and its consequences, including sickness and disease.  The Bible makes it clear that people could not pay the price for their redemption, so God out of His love and for the glory of His own name provided the ultimate atonement (Romans 3:25; see also Psalms 65:3; 78:38; 79:9; Romans 3:21–28). All this was accomplished through Christ at Calvary (John 3:14–16). There He made a full atonement for the whole person. The New Testament speaks of this as redemption, which has essentially the same meaning as atonement. Through Christ we have received redemption and the forgiveness of sins (Romans 3:24; Ephesians 1:7; Colossians 1:14; Hebrews 9:15).

[19] 4 
found more than 250 times in Rome alone. However, the masculine form Junias  is 
unknown in any Greco-Roman source. This deliberate change of the Greek has now been 
corrected in the texts used by pastors and scholars.  
 
Scripture clearly advocates for  women as ministers and leaders . Instances of women 
filling leadership roles in the Bible should be taken as a divinely approved pattern. It 
should not be seen as an exception to divine decrees.

[20] Redemption, accomplished through the atonement of Christ, provides reconciliation for sin and its consequences. Even where sickness is not the direct result of specific sin, it is still in the world because of sin. Therefore it is among the works of the devil Jesus came to destroy (1 John 3:8) and is thus included in the Atonement.  From the parallel between redemption and atonement, we see that provision for the healing of our bodies is part of the redemption spoken of in Romans 8:23. We receive the forgiveness of sins now in connection with the redemption of our souls. We shall receive the redemption of our bodies when we are caught up to meet the Lord and are changed into His likeness (1 Corinthians 15:51–54; 2 Corinthians 5:1–4; 1 John 3:2). Divine healing now is a foretaste of this, and, like all the blessings of the gospel, flows from the Atonement. III. Divine Healing Is a Gift of God’s Grace for All Just as salvation is by grace through faith (Ephesians 2:8), so all God’s

[21] and, like all the blessings of the gospel, flows from the Atonement. III. Divine Healing Is a Gift of God’s Grace for All Just as salvation is by grace through faith (Ephesians 2:8), so all God’s blessings and gifts are ours by His grace, or unmerited favor. They cannot be earned or deserved. It should be noted that instead of demanding healing from Jesus, the New Testament records that people came asking for His compassionate ministry. They did not look on healing as their right, but as a gracious privilege extended to them.  That we cannot earn God’s blessings, including divine healing, should make us realize the importance of cultivating our life in the Spirit, for the Spirit will “give life to your mortal bodies,” and that is our real hope (Romans 8:11). In fact, even though outwardly we are wasting away, inwardly we are being renewed day by day (2 Corinthians 4:16).  It is this inner renewal that makes us best able to have the faith to receive the gift of divine healing. To the

[22] we are wasting away, inwardly we are being renewed day by day (2 Corinthians 4:16).  It is this inner renewal that makes us best able to have the faith to receive the gift of divine healing. To the woman healed of her twelve-year-long bleeding, Jesus said, “Your faith has healed you” (Mark 5:34). Paul at Lystra, when he saw that listening to his preaching had brought faith to be healed into the heart of a cripple, commanded him to stand up (Acts 14:9,10). Faith is seen also in the Roman centurion who recognized the authority of Christ’s word for the healing of his servant (Matthew 8:5–13) and the Canaanite woman who believed in Jesus for the healing of her daughter (Mark 7:24–30; Matthew 15:28).  That divine healing comes through faith is further confirmed by the fact that unbelief hindered its reception at Nazareth (Mark 6:5,6) and at the foot of the Mount of Transfiguration (Matthew 17:14–20). James 5:15 promises that the prayer of faith offered for the sick by the elders of the

[23] its reception at Nazareth (Mark 6:5,6) and at the foot of the Mount of Transfiguration (Matthew 17:14–20). James 5:15 promises that the prayer of faith offered for the sick by the elders of the church will make the sick well and the Lord will raise them up. Faith, then, receives healing through the simple Word of the Lord. But Jesus did not turn away from those who had little faith or who did not seem to express any faith at all. Those who are sick often find it is not easy to express faith, and Jesus did a variety of things to help them. Some He touched (Mark 1:41; 8:22), took their hands (Mark 1:31; Luke 14:4), or laid His hands upon them (Mark 6:5; 8:25; Luke 4:40; 13:13). Others He helped by a variety of acts, some of which called for faith and obedience on their part (Mark 7:33; 8:23).

[24] The missionaries introduced in this chapter illustrated this passion and labored 
in a variety of contexts. In different ways, they were all pioneers. Noel Perkin served in 
Argentina for several years, became the missionary secretary, and published a policy 
manual for missionaries to improve working relationships. In Burkina Faso, Arthur 
E. Wilson helped lay the groundwork for a strong national church. Ralph D. Williams 
started a model Bible institute in El Salvador. Jessie Wengler evangelized in Japan, a 
non-Christian country noted for its resistance to the gospel. Finally, drug addicts and 
other needy persons heard the gospel from Marie Stephany in North China.
NOEL PERKIN
1893–1979
That Noel Perkin fl  unked his Latin exam proved fortu-
nate for the Assemblies of God. Otherwise, he might have 
spent his life as a dentist in England. Perkin was born into 
a moderately well-to-do English family who were mem-
bers of the Wesleyan Methodist Church. Although his par-

[25] spent his life as a dentist in England. Perkin was born into 
a moderately well-to-do English family who were mem-
bers of the Wesleyan Methodist Church. Although his par-
ents had sent him to a church boarding school at Cam-
bridge, he rebelled against their faith. Now with a career in 
dentistry doomed, he turned to banking. Like other young 
Englishmen of his day, he left England to seek his fortune 
in some outpost of the British Empire. He got as far as 
Canada, where he settled in Toronto to work at the branch 
offi  ce of the Bank of Montreal.
Unfortunately, he made friends with other young men of his standing and lived 
“a careless life, drinking and smoking as was customary among that group.” But after 
being diagnosed with tuberculosis, he began to think about the welfare of his soul. 
Taking up residence in a boarding house run by a former missionary, he knelt in prayer 
one day in his room, “telling the Lord that I believed He was alive and if this were

[26] Taking up residence in a boarding house run by a former missionary, he knelt in prayer 
one day in his room, “telling the Lord that I believed He was alive and if this were 
true, He was interested in those who are sick and needy, and I asked Him to heal me 
of my disease. I felt that was a turning point and believe that at that moment I was 
born into a new life.”
After his conversion and healing, he attended services at the Christian and Mis-
sionary Alliance church in Toronto. His fellowshipping with Pentecostal believers 
who had formerly belonged to the Alliance, however, led to his Spirit baptism. He 
was then spiritually mentored by the leader of the group, Christian Schoonmaker, a 
missionary to India residing in Canada at the time. 
Harry Turner, an Alliance missionary who had received the Pentecostal baptism 
with speaking in tongues, invited Perkin and another friend to join him in Argen-

[27] Harry Turner, an Alliance missionary who had received the Pentecostal baptism 
with speaking in tongues, invited Perkin and another friend to join him in Argen-
tina. So in 1918 Perkin did just that. Since the three missionaries worked with little 
pledged support, they decided on chicken farming for additional support. Appar-
ently they were not called to be chicken farmers; the hens died from an amoebic 
disease. 
HARVESTING IN THE FIELDS OF THE LORD
211
Noel Perkin
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[28] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
After three years and a diminished savings account, Perkin returned to Canada. 
While visiting the Rochester Bible Training School in Rochester, New York, he met 
Ora Blanchard, who later became his wife. After several years of pastoral work, Perkin 
moved to Springfi  eld to work at Gospel Publishing House and the Foreign Missions 
Department. The Council needed his expertise in bookkeeping. The department had 
previously forwarded designated offerings to the intended missionaries and then 
sent small yellow receipts to the donors. Duplicates were fi  led in alphabetical order 
in an envelope box. Incredibly, hundreds of thousands of dollars were processed by 
this means. Obviously, the time had come for a more effi  cient and reliable procedure. 
When Perkin arrived, he installed a proper bookkeeping system with an account for 
every missionary.
At the time of his permanent appointment as missionary secretary in 1927,

[29] When Perkin arrived, he installed a proper bookkeeping system with an account for 
every missionary.
At the time of his permanent appointment as missionary secretary in 1927,  
Assemblies of God missions showed remarkable growth. Giving since 1925 had 
jumped 28 percent, reaching three hundred thousand dollars, and the missionary 
roster had gone up 18 percent to 277. Although only thirty-four years old, Perkin 
brought several strengths to the offi  ce: missionary and pastoral experience, fi nancial 
skills, a warm and winning personality, and a capacity to adjust to new situations and 
move ahead with the times. 
His fi  rst major achievement appeared with the publication of a policy manual in 
1931. Though only twenty-eight pages long, it contained a philosophy of missions, 
a brief historical sketch, and a statement of departmental policies. When listing the 
qualifi cations for missionary appointment, it stipulated that priority went to those

[30] a brief historical sketch, and a statement of departmental policies. When listing the 
qualifi cations for missionary appointment, it stipulated that priority went to those 
having defi  nite calls from God, proven effectiveness in ministry, and commitment to 
“scriptural” methods of missions. But regardless of all these factors, life in the Spirit 
and holiness of character remained foremost.
The host of people who entered the Assemblies of God from the Alliance were 
among A. B. Simpson’s best pupils, having been schooled in his vision for missions 
212
Missionary Policies
Term of Service:
It should be the resolution of the missionary, God permitting, that his entire life 
shall be spent in missionary service. . . . Should it be necessary for the missionary’s 
health or for the good of the work to return to the homeland, a furlough will be consid-
ered on the advice of the Field Council. However, the nature of our organization does

[31] health or for the good of the work to return to the homeland, a furlough will be consid-
ered on the advice of the Field Council. However, the nature of our organization does 
not permit the guaranteeing of a furlough after any deﬁ  nite length of time. . . . 
Marriage: 
It is desirable that engaged couples should not marry until the completion of two 
years from the date of arrival of the one who last reaches the ﬁ  eld, and the successful 
passing of both parties of such examinations in the language as are prescribed for that 
period by the ﬁ eld concerned.
—Missionary Department of the Assemblies of God, 
Missionary Manual (1931), 19–21.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[32] for the fi eld. Sparks fl  ew from those who held that consulting doctors was a denial 
of their belief in divine healing. One veteran missionary, Hilda Wagenknecht, simply 
refused to have a checkup. Confronted with her objection as well as her claim to good 
health, the Foreign Missions Committee swallowed hard and allowed her to return 
to India. But candidates who couldn’t pass the examination were simply advised to 
go home and “pray through” until healed. Appointment would then be forthcoming. 
The curious importance attached to a medical checkup in a denomination that 
stressed divine healing points to the pragmatism underlying Assemblies of God mis-
sions. Common sense dictated that little could be expected from a missionary in poor 
health. If medical treatment resolved the problem, they could resume their ministry. 
But if God healed them directly, so much the better—the doctrine still stood.
HARVESTING IN THE FIELDS OF THE LORD
213
Haven’t You Heard about Pearl Harbor?
I

[33] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
Perkin did not visit any of the mission fi elds until nine years after taking offi ce. Two 
reasons account for this: the department’s fi  nancial straits and Perkin’s commitment 
to administrative duties. By 1936, however, the fi  nancial picture had changed, and he 
made his fi  rst trip to Puerto Rico, Santo Domingo (present-day Dominican Republic), 
and Cuba. 
The membership of the Assemblies of God in the Foreign Missions Conference 
of North America brought many benefi  ts. At one of the gatherings, Perkin became 
friends with Emory Ross, a noted missionary and mission leader with the Disciples 
of Christ. Ross urged him to continue traveling abroad, both to encourage the mis-
sionaries and to gain a better understanding of their situations and problems. He 
accepted the advice, and by the time of his retirement in 1959, he had gone around 
the world three times and visited nearly every country in the world.

[34] accepted the advice, and by the time of his retirement in 1959, he had gone around 
the world three times and visited nearly every country in the world. 
During his thirty-two year tenure, Perkin became well known in the U.S. postal 
service because of the huge volume of mail he received from overseas. On one occa-
sion, a postcard arrived from Africa addressed only “Noel Perkin,  America.” 
ARTHUR E. WILSON 
(1892–1984)
While the saints back home were singing “When We All Get to Heaven” and “I’ll 
Fly Away,” Arthur Wilson and other Assemblies of God missionaries were hard at 
work in Africa laying the groundwork for a strong national church. Though it might 
appear that the folks back home thought only of the Second Coming, they shared the 
conviction with the missionaries that the second 
coming of Christ was at hand and believed that 
the mission fi  elds were ripe for the great end-
time harvest. As partners, missionaries and sup-
porting congregations knew that the task ahead

[35] coming of Christ was at hand and believed that 
the mission fi  elds were ripe for the great end-
time harvest. As partners, missionaries and sup-
porting congregations knew that the task ahead 
might take time and would not be easy. Mission-
aries, therefore, had to translate, teach believers 
to read, and train workers because, as Jesus said, 
“‘Night is coming, when no one can work’” (John 
9:4).
Wilson, a member of the fi  rst graduating 
class at Central Bible Institute, represented the 
new generation of missionaries (at least the 
majority) that had received spiritual formation 
in Bible institutes. In part, their student experi-
ence contributed to the long-term appeal of teamwork: Coming from many churches, 
Bible school students lived, studied, prayed, and ministered together. Their loyalties 
grew broader than to simply the home congregation. Indeed, as mission expenses 
increased over the years, the networking among graduates—many of them now pas-

[36] grew broader than to simply the home congregation. Indeed, as mission expenses 
increased over the years, the networking among graduates—many of them now pas-
tors—enabled missionaries to raise support more easily.
214
 Arthur E. Wilson and his second wife, Eliza-
beth. She had served as a missionary to the 
Philippines before they were married.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[37] When Arthur and Jennie Wilson arrived in Burkina Faso in 1926, they joined efforts 
with other pioneers already there. Plans were laid in 1928 for reducing the Mossi lan-
guage to writing and then for translating the New Testament, Sunday School lessons, 
doctrinal studies, and gospel songs. (Fellow missionaries John and Cuba Hall spear-
headed the translation of the entire Bible into More, the language of the Mossi peo-
ple. In his translation work, John personally typed the Bible six times.)
In the early 1930s, the Foreign Missions Department began publishing booklets 
that highlighted various mission fi  elds. Each described the country and its residents, 
as well as the work of the missionaries. Wilson wrote A Visit to Mos[s]iland (about 1932). 
In describing the people, he noted, “the Mos[s]ies are of negrotic stock. Mentally, 
they are not the equal of some other tribes, but they are not of such low mentality as

[38] In describing the people, he noted, “the Mos[s]ies are of negrotic stock. Mentally, 
they are not the equal of some other tribes, but they are not of such low mentality as 
some have supposed. They can be trained to a very satisfactory degree.” Unwittingly, 
Wilson had carried an American racial myth in his cultural baggage to Africa. Like 
other missionaries, he was a child of his time. Fortunately, as the years passed, such 
attitudes receded, due in part to changing racial attitudes in the United States and 
growing appreciation of cross-cultural differences.
At the same time, Wilson also recognized the insights of the Mossi culture and 
concurred with the saying, “‘The white man’s sense is in his books, but the black man’s 
sense is in his head.’” He agreed, saying, “I have met some old men who, though they 
knew nothing of books, yet they were fi  lled with wisdom.”
Wilson proved to be one of the best missionaries sent to Africa. His love for

[39] knew nothing of books, yet they were fi  lled with wisdom.”
Wilson proved to be one of the best missionaries sent to Africa. His love for 
the Mossi people grew over his many years of service. Unlike earlier missionaries 
who often had no strategy beyond tongues and prayer for the sick, he understood 
indigenous church principles. With other missionaries, he looked ahead to a self-sup-
porting, self-governing, and self-propagating national church. In his estimation, this 
necessitated a “trained native ministry,” one not dependent on American money. “The 
time has come,” he wrote, “to divorce the preaching of the gospel in foreign countries 
from home fi nances.”
The preparation of locals as Christian workers offered crucial advantages: “The 
natives know their own people as no white man will ever know them . . . , can endure 
hardships that would kill a white man,” and “are given more liberty to preach.” With

[40] natives know their own people as no white man will ever know them . . . , can endure 
hardships that would kill a white man,” and “are given more liberty to preach.” With 
proper training and mentoring, they could carry on in the event that the missionaries 
were forced to leave. In 2001, the Assemblies of God of Burkina Faso celebrated its 
eightieth anniversary with over 547,000 members and adherents in a nation of 12.5 
million people. Its impressive growth can be attributed to revival, mature leadership, 
and the combined “senses” of the black person and the white person.
RALPH D. WILLIAMS
(1902–1989)
Revisiting her native England, Alice E. Luce met Ralph and Richard Williams and 
became acquainted with their plans to study at Glad Tidings Bible Institute in San 
Francisco. Welshmen with a Methodist background, they had been converted and 
HARVESTING IN THE FIELDS OF THE LORD
215

[41] Francisco. Welshmen with a Methodist background, they had been converted and 
HARVESTING IN THE FIELDS OF THE LORD
215
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[42] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
baptized in the Spirit during a Pentecostal revival in 1919. They had dedicated their 
lives to Latin-American missions. The Williams brothers and Alice Luce became life-
long friends and, for a time, colleagues. 
Through Luce’s mentoring and their studies at Glad Tidings, the Williams broth-
ers became familiar with Roland Allen’s Missionary Methods: St. Paul’s or Ours? Not 
without controversy in some missions circles, Allen’s message challenged mission-
aries to follow Paul’s methods for church planting. In 1926 the brothers received 
missionary appointment and went to San Diego to assist Luce in her church and at 
Berean Bible Institute. 
When Richard and his wife left for Peru, Ralph and his wife, Jewyl, went to Mexico 
to work in a Bible institute. At the invitation of Salvadoran Pentecostals, they jour-
neyed to El Salvador in 1929. Having little money and only their luggage, they had no

[43] to work in a Bible institute. At the invitation of Salvadoran Pentecostals, they jour-
neyed to El Salvador in 1929. Having little money and only their luggage, they had no 
alternative but to live very close to the level of the people. Their diet consisted mostly 
of black beans, rice, and tortillas. For housing, they rented “some ‘almost bare rooms’ 
in town which they abandoned occasionally to scrimp on money.”
Visiting the churches with Francisco Arbizú, a Salvadoran evangelist and teacher, 
the Williamses were surprised at the worship they observed. With spontaneous 
expressions of tongues, testimonies, and praises, the services went on for hours. 
Congregations “seemed untiring, always ready to sing, to pray and to testify.” But the 
“mixture of zeal and ignorance” and erroneous teachings, which negatively affected 
the moral behavior of believers, deeply troubled Williams. Nevertheless, he respected

[44] “mixture of zeal and ignorance” and erroneous teachings, which negatively affected 
the moral behavior of believers, deeply troubled Williams. Nevertheless, he respected 
the freedom they felt in “praying aloud, praying in tongues, or [giving] spiritual utter-
ance in prophecy. And they were never hesitant about praying for the sick with genu-
ine expectation of being healed.”
Arbizú and Williams worked together to establish a doctrinal standard for the 
churches and arranged meetings for discussing the issues. Getting church represen-
tatives to cooperate was no easy task. But a constitution did win approval in 1930 
that placed the churches on an indigenous footing. A year later, Williams began a 
Bible institute and introduced, with Arbizú, the Reglamento Local, A Standard of Christian 
Doctrine and Practice. Those who sought church membership had to be knowledgeable 
of it as well as demonstrate a godly lifestyle. This worked so well in El Salvador that

[45] Doctrine and Practice. Those who sought church membership had to be knowledgeable 
of it as well as demonstrate a godly lifestyle. This worked so well in El Salvador that 
Assemblies of God churches in many Latin-American countries adopted it.
Williams’s contribution to foreign missions centered on his applying indigenous 
church principles and pioneering quality training for pastors and leaders. Bible insti-
tutes were made successful by at least three characteristics:  adaptability, a direct 
connection to evangelism and church planting, and a growing curriculum. Because 
national churches and missionaries had limited fi  nancial resources, adaptability was 
 essential to overcoming problems of geography, resources, and facilities. 
Years later, when teaching at a Bible school in Barquisimeto, Venezuela, Williams 
learned there were people who wanted to attend classes, but lived too far away. The 
 answer lay in starting night schools in Maracaibo and  Cabimas, a combined popula-

[46] learned there were people who wanted to attend classes, but lived too far away. The 
 answer lay in starting night schools in Maracaibo and  Cabimas, a combined popula-
tion center of over one million. All ten Assemblies of God churches in the area sent 
216
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[47] students to the two schools. Those without cars 
could walk to the schools. The school in Cabimas 
saved students a two-hour ride and payment of 
expensive tolls on a bridge six miles long. 
The sponsoring committee in Maraca-
ibo had resources to provide classrooms and 
equipment, but the one in Cabimas was not 
so fortunate. “There were no desks,” Wil-
liams reported. “Some used iron chairs 
purchased from an old theater. Also the 
church designated for the classes 
had no roof. There was, however, 
a lean-to-annex running down 
one side of the building which 
was to serve as the classroom. 
With the large number of students, this narrow annex proved to be too hot and stuffy, 
so we moved out into the roofl  ess auditorium. We now hold our classes under the 
starry sky, except for those nights when the rain chases us back under cover.”
Much to the surprise of Williams and his colleagues, when the schools opened,

[48] starry sky, except for those nights when the rain chases us back under cover.”
Much to the surprise of Williams and his colleagues, when the schools opened, 
forty-six students enrolled in Maracaibo and twenty-eight in Cabimas. The consecra-
tion of students and teachers and the ministry of God’s Word—not the facilities—led 
HARVESTING IN THE FIELDS OF THE LORD
217
Ralph D. Williams
Highway in the Sky
W
orld War II had hampered all missionary activities in most parts of the world. 
One of the more visible efforts to increase missionary effectiveness was to buy a 
trans-oceanic type airplane.
Following World War II, commercial ﬂ  ights were not readily available. The ﬁ  rst 
Ambassador was a modiﬁ  ed army surplus Highway in the Sky C-46. It had been con-
verted from a cargo plane and could hold 40 passengers. Later, realizing that four 
motors are better than two—especially when there is nothing below except the ocean—
the C-46 was sold, and a converted B-17 bomber was bought.

[49] motors are better than two—especially when there is nothing below except the ocean—
the C-46 was sold, and a converted B-17 bomber was bought.
Although the air service lasted only 3 years (1948–51), the two Ambassadors
brought prestige and glamour to the missionary efforts—or as George Carmichael 
described it, “The heavens have become a highway.”
Converting the C-46 cargo plane was no small task. The original surplus cost of 
$5,000 quickly jumped to an investment of $20,000. But still the Ambassador was con-
sidered a bargain because the plane had cost the government more than $200,000.
Paying for it was not so hard either. Assemblies of God youth caught the spirit of 
the project and helped pay for the Ambassador through Speed the Light projects.
—Wayne Warner, “Flying Ambassadors of Goodwill” 
Assemblies of God Heritage 5 (winter 1985–86): 3.

[50] the project and helped pay for the Ambassador through Speed the Light projects.
—Wayne Warner, “Flying Ambassadors of Goodwill” 
Assemblies of God Heritage 5 (winter 1985–86): 3.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[51] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
to the success of such institutions. Modest beginnings would eventually be super-
seded by improvements, as they trusted God. 
Like other Assemblies of God missionaries, Williams found that building an 
indigenous church meant training potential leaders. Upon arriving on the mission 
fi elds, missionaries quite naturally assumed they would continue to focus their 
energies on pulpit ministry. Much to their surprise, however, they found themselves 
behind lecterns much of the time, teaching classes in Bible institutes. Since 1922, 
when Assemblies of God missionaries founded their fi  rst overseas Bible institute in 
North China, the denomination has made enormous investments in personnel and 
monies for training national leaders. Indeed, it was far greater than Ralph Williams 
or anyone else could have imagined. Mission statistics for 2002 revealed 1,893 Bible 
schools and extension programs with over 90,534 students, supported by the General

[52] or anyone else could have imagined. Mission statistics for 2002 revealed 1,893 Bible 
schools and extension programs with over 90,534 students, supported by the General 
Council and its fraternally related constituencies worldwide.
JESSIE WENGLER
(1887–1958)
Women were indispensable to the growth of Assemblies of God missions, and 
for decades married and single women made up two-thirds of the missionary per-
sonnel. While often inaccurately stereotyped as simply workers in mission schools 
and orphanages, many, like Jessie Wengler and Marie Stephany, evangelized and 
taught prospective pastors. They served in the ranks of many other missionaries who 
pioneered on the “stony ground” of non-Christian countries. Along with those who 
labored in the Middle East, India, Sri Lanka, and Indonesia, 
they rejoiced in what appeared to others as “small harvests.” 
On her application for endorsement as a missionary, 
under “experience” Wengler had listed teaching music, work-

[53] they rejoiced in what appeared to others as “small harvests.” 
On her application for endorsement as a missionary, 
under “experience” Wengler had listed teaching music, work-
ing in the offi  ce of a Pentecostal publisher, participating in 
jail and hospital ministry, and handing out tracts. In addi-
tion, she had studied at a teacher training college in Col-
orado, Moody Bible Institute in Chicago, and Brooks Bible 
Institute in St. Louis. Without having been a pastor or evan-
gelist, she received appointment in 1919, but for whatever 
reason she waited thirty years for ordination. 
Pentecostal missionaries had worked in Japan since 1907. When Wengler arrived 
at the turn of 1920, she joined the Carl and John Juergensen families and others 
already there. In addition to evangelism, she later threw her energies into teaching at 
the Bible institute in Tokyo. 
Along with others who anticipated the soon return of Christ, she interpreted nat-

[54] the Bible institute in Tokyo. 
Along with others who anticipated the soon return of Christ, she interpreted nat-
ural calamities as divine judgments, prophetic “signs of the times” (Matthew 16:3). 
Through a revelation, Wengler declared that the devastating earthquake that hit Japan 
in 1923 signaled God’s wrath on the country. On the night of September 1, 1923, from 
her home in an outlying district, she saw the red horizon over Yokahoma and Tokyo, 
218
Jessie Wengler
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[55] which stretched for miles. “As I sat there in the dark with the Japanese people all 
around me,” she wrote, “I saw something in the clouds . . . , the form of a cherub; in 
the hand of the cherub was a vial, and he was pouring that vial upon the earth. That 
scripture which tells of the wrath of God being poured out on the earth came to my 
mind” (Revelation 16). At that moment, she didn’t know that hundreds of thousands 
were being burned to death because of fi  res sparked by the earthquake. 
“As I  looked,” she recounted to a wide-eyed gathering of believers at Central 
Assembly of God in Springfi  eld, Missouri, “this cherub seemed to change, and it was 
Jesus Himself. He was standing with His hands outstretched, and I cannot describe the 
awful agony on His face. It seemed as though He were pleading with the people. When 
I afterwards learned of the awfulness of that calamity, I knew that God had shown me

[56] awful agony on His face. It seemed as though He were pleading with the people. When 
I afterwards learned of the awfulness of that calamity, I knew that God had shown me 
that He was moving in the earth, and I believe that that  calamity was one of the signs of 
the time in which we are living. Of all the missionaries of the many denominations that 
were on the fi  eld, only one was killed. God protected His people at that time.”
Little did she realize that a greater holocaust was not much more than twenty 
years ahead and that she would experience it fi  rsthand. Before the United States 
would be engulfed in a world war for the second time, Noel Perkin notifi  ed the mis-
sionaries to return home at the department’s expense. The year was 1941. Unfortu-
nately, Wengler had been confi  ned to a hospital bed for several months. By the time 
she was well enough to be released, the Japanese navy had attacked Pearl Harbor

[57] nately, Wengler had been confi  ned to a hospital bed for several months. By the time 
she was well enough to be released, the Japanese navy had attacked Pearl Harbor 
and brought the United States into the confl ict. Even after her release, she remained 
partially paralyzed on her left side, and she was suffering from heart trouble so was 
unable to travel. Though she grew stronger in some respects, her health remained 
fragile throughout the war.
The Japanese authorities kept her under house arrest but allowed her to walk 
to the market when she needed to buy food. As conditions worsened, the govern-
ment rationed food and charcoal. The uncertainty of daily living severely tested her 
HARVESTING IN THE FIELDS OF THE LORD
219
Waiting for the Ambassador
I
 was superintendent for Gold Coast [present-day Ghana] when the Ambassadors were 
operating, and no one was happier than I was when the planes were sold. It was said 
that they ﬂ  ew “on a song and a gallon of gas.”

[58] operating, and no one was happier than I was when the planes were sold. It was said 
that they ﬂ  ew “on a song and a gallon of gas.”
I was responsible for booking ﬂ  ights in Africa, and they were always late. That 
meant entertaining missionaries for days while we waited for the plane.
Two days after we sent our boys home on the Ambassador, we received a telegram 
from Brother Perkin who asked if we had any news concerning the Ambassador. We 
learned that it had been sitting at Roberts Field in Liberia for 2 days!
I never rode the Ambassadors and wouldn’t for all the tea in China.
Eric M. Johnson
—“Letters from Our Readers,” 
Assemblies of God Heritage 5 (spring 1985–86): 15.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[59] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
faith, but she found comfort and strength in prayer. It was dangerous for Japanese 
Christians to be seen with an American; occasionally they sneaked food to Wengler 
at night. “Once a Japanese doctor sent me a big bag of bones,” she remembered. “The 
bones were full of marrow, so I made nourishing soup from them.” Yet because of the 
general food shortage, her weight dropped from a normal 124 pounds to just under 
90 pounds. When she had no food, she drank tea.
Unable to receive money from America, she asked the Swiss legation to inter-
vene for her with the Japanese government. It had confi  scated and sold two pieces of 
property she owned and kept the money. When the authorities reversed themselves 
and allowed her to draw monthly from the account, she considered it nothing short 
of a miracle. 
The bombing of Tokyo intensifi  ed in November 1944. Hundreds of American 
B-29s, B-24s, and P-51s fl  ew nightly sorties over Tokyo, dropping their loads of incen-

[60] of a miracle. 
The bombing of Tokyo intensifi  ed in November 1944. Hundreds of American 
B-29s, B-24s, and P-51s fl  ew nightly sorties over Tokyo, dropping their loads of incen-
diary bombs. During these months, the police moved her from suburb to suburb and 
fi nally housed her with fi  ve American Baptist missionaries who had also not been 
interned. One night, bombs rained around them and they fl  ed for their lives. Running 
through a wall of fi  re, they found refuge in a school compound. Frightful sounds of 
bombs coming through the air terrorized them: “You thought it was coming straight 
for you when actually it was falling some distance away.” She said, “I was not afraid 
to die, yet the screams of thousands of people burning to death and the sound of the 
raging fi  res was the most terrible thing I have ever heard.”
220
The Miracle Cow
I
n 1941, Robert and Mildred Tangen, mission-
aries to China, transferred to Baguio, Philip-

[61] raging fi  res was the most terrible thing I have ever heard.”
220
The Miracle Cow
I
n 1941, Robert and Mildred Tangen, mission-
aries to China, transferred to Baguio, Philip-
pines, to escape the impending war.  When the 
Japanese invaded the Philippines in December 
1941, the Tangens once again found them-
selves in “harm’s way.” Five hundred civilians, 
including the Tangens who were expecting 
their ﬁ  rst baby, were interned near Baguio. 
Forced to live in deplorable conditions and subjected to mental cruelty, they faced a 
starvation diet of wormy rice gruel.  Six months later, little “Bobby” Tangen was born. 
Although the internees repeatedly asked for milk for the babies and nursing mothers in 
the camp, their captors ignored the requests. As the situation worsened and Mildred’s 
milk began to dry up, a miracle happened.  A cow with a young calf suddenly appeared 
at the camp and stood by the fence. That cow faithfully supplied milk for the internees

[62] milk began to dry up, a miracle happened.  A cow with a young calf suddenly appeared 
at the camp and stood by the fence. That cow faithfully supplied milk for the internees 
until the day before their transfer to a prison in Manila where they were rescued by the 
American forces.
—Annette Newberry
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[63] Wengler’s relatively benevolent treatment by the Japanese contrasts sharply with 
that endured by missionaries held in internment camps. When the war ended, she 
continued her ministry and served as the Assemblies of God representative to the 
Allied Powers during the occupation of Japan. With other missionaries, she envi-
sioned the postwar period as “an unparalleled opportunity for the uplifting of the 
Christian faith, which makes it possible for the Church in Japan to rise up out of her 
despair and live anew in Christ.” Wengler was in Japan working toward that goal when 
she died at seventy-one.
MARIE STEPHANY
(1878–1963)
In the 1920s and 1930s, the government of Shansi province in North China strug-
gled with the rise of opium addiction and the climbing crime rate that came with it. To 
stamp out the problem, they fi rst prepared places for addicts to live in order to pro-
vide a positive atmosphere in which they could break the habit. Despite the provision

[64] stamp out the problem, they fi rst prepared places for addicts to live in order to pro-
vide a positive atmosphere in which they could break the habit. Despite the provision 
of food and kind treatment, they turned to opium again when they were released. In 
frustration, the authorities then ruled that every drug dealer 
should be beheaded; the warning had little effect. Finally, 
they decreed that all who sold opium, as well as those who 
smoked it, should be taken outside the gates of the cities and 
shot. Though hundreds of people were executed in this fash-
ion, the slavery of drug addiction increased. Into this context 
of suffering came thirty-eight-year-old Marie Stephany. 
Born in Hungary, Stephany and her family had immi-
grated to the United States and taken up residence in Cleve-
land, Ohio. From her early years, life had been diffi cult, often 
requiring hard work and long hours to support herself. After

[65] grated to the United States and taken up residence in Cleve-
land, Ohio. From her early years, life had been diffi cult, often 
requiring hard work and long hours to support herself. After 
conversion, she received Holy Spirit baptism at the Christian and Missionary Alliance 
church in Cleveland (later First Pentecostal Church) and felt called to China. She then 
went to Beulah Heights Bible and Missionary Training Institute to prepare for minis-
try. In 1916, Stephany received missionary ordination from the Assemblies of God and 
sailed for China. As with many other Pentecostals who traveled overseas in mission, 
she received formal missionary appointment after the fact, in her case three years later. 
Stephany made her home in Taiyuan, the capital of Shansi province, where she 
spent two years in language study. In 1919 she moved twenty-fi  ve miles outside the 
city to the village of Huei Ren with just two hundred dollars in her purse. There she

[66] spent two years in language study. In 1919 she moved twenty-fi  ve miles outside the 
city to the village of Huei Ren with just two hundred dollars in her purse. There she 
opened a chapel in a building located between a theater and a temple and began 
preaching the gospel. She later moved to Ta Ch’ang, where she continued her minis-
try. When the great famine of 1920 and 1921 devastated this region of China, she took 
children into her home to share her food with them.
Like other Pentecostals who believed in the priority of evangelism over charita-
ble endeavors, she found herself caught with the need to help the hurting. “I must tell 
HARVESTING IN THE FIELDS OF THE LORD
221
 Marie Stephany
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[67] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
you a little about my orphanage,” she wrote in a book entitled The Power of the Gospel 
in Shansi Province. “Although I am not called to this kind of work, I am praying that 
the Lord will defi  nitely call a missionary to take it upon her heart so that we may be 
able to take in more children.” Already assisted by Alice Stewart, the arrival of Henri-
etta Tieleman shortly after the book’s publication in 1934 must have seemed like an 
answer to prayer.
Stephany needed all the help she could get. Not only did she and her cowork-
ers administer an orphanage and conduct evangelistic meetings, but they also ran a 
Bible school and ministered to drug addicts. The strategy of training Chinese believ-
ers paid rich dividends in church planting. “Thank God, we have seen signs following 
the preaching of the gospel in China,” she reported. “The Lord has given the gift of 
healing to some of the native evangelists and pastors. A native pastor who has charge

[68] the preaching of the gospel in China,” she reported. “The Lord has given the gift of 
healing to some of the native evangelists and pastors. A native pastor who has charge 
of one of the outstations has prayed for hopeless cases, one a man who had been an 
invalid from rheumatism for fi  ve years. After he was prayed for he was able to get up 
and make his own living.” Stephany, Stewart, Tieleman, and other female missionar-
ies who taught in Bible institutes often proved to be effective mentors to young men 
training for the ministry, in some cases, more successful than male missionaries.
During Stephany’s twenty-six years in China, many people testifi  ed to being 
delivered from the “devil’s smoke” under her ministry. In some respects, her approach 
could be compared to an early kind of Teen Challenge ministry (an Assemblies of God 
program that began in the late 1950s). No one could deny the courageous achieve-

[69] could be compared to an early kind of Teen Challenge ministry (an Assemblies of God 
program that began in the late 1950s). No one could deny the courageous achieve-
ments of this woman—affectionately known as “Mother Peace”—who served in China 
during turbulent times.
222
 The “girls” at the beach, missionaries attending missionary conference on the 
Chinese coast: (l-r) Marie Stephany, Martina Kvamme, Alice Stewart, Palma 
Ramsborg, Irene Larsen, Ruth Melching, Helen Gustavson, Pansy Blossom
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[70] HARVESTING IN THE FIELDS OF THE LORD
223
Out of Revulsion, Love
A
fter the chanting ceased, the lamas 
welcomed us and asked us to be 
seated. A servant passed around a 
large bowl to each guest. I asked David, 
“What kind of soup is this?”
David replied, “‘It is Tibetan tea 
with yak butter. The hot drink will do 
you good!”
As the bowl of brown liquid was 
placed in my hands as a gesture of hos-
pitality and friendship, I noticed some 
hairs ﬂ  oating gracefully on top, along 
with a chunk of yak butter-and even a 
few lice. The rancid odor of the butter 
made me feel sick. I realized that I must 
drink; to refuse would seriously offend 
our hosts.
Desperately, I prayed two prayers: 
ﬁ rst, after blowing off some of the top 
layer that included the hairs and lice, 
I said, “Lord, thank You! Help me to 
accept their hospitality and to drink 
this stuff”; then, after gulping most of it 
down, “Lord,” I pleaded, “help me now to keep it down!”. . .

[71] I said, “Lord, thank You! Help me to 
accept their hospitality and to drink 
this stuff”; then, after gulping most of it 
down, “Lord,” I pleaded, “help me now to keep it down!”. . .
We took the path down the mountain to La-p’u to spend the night in the dirty inn. 
But I could not sleep. The Tibetans in this area appeared to me even more ﬁ  lthy than 
any of the Lisu I had met. A revulsion was rising up and growing stronger within me, 
undoing all the progress I had made in adjusting to the cultures. I felt myself drawing 
back, not wanting to mingle with these people any more. But how could I minister to 
the people when I felt I could never love them? Praying desperately, I cried, “Lord, help 
me!”
That night the Lord spoke to me in a dream. I saw a ﬁ  lthy individual standing before 
me, draped in an assortment of rags. I exclaimed, “This must be one of the ﬁ  lthiest 
persons I’ve ever seen!”
Then the Lord Jesus spoke softly, “Leonard, that is how you appeared in My sight.

[72] me, draped in an assortment of rags. I exclaimed, “This must be one of the ﬁ  lthiest 
persons I’ve ever seen!”
Then the Lord Jesus spoke softly, “Leonard, that is how you appeared in My sight. 
But I loved you when you were unlovely. I died on the cross for you. Before My precious 
blood was applied to you, you were just as unclean as any of these people who have 
never washed. But I loved you. Can you not love these less fortunate people for Me?”
Then I awoke. As I prayed, I experienced a baptism of love; His love was shed 
abroad in my heart by the Holy Spirit. From that time on my attitude changed com-
pletely. God gave me such a love for the Tibetans and the Lisu that I was able to eat with 
them, sit with them, sleep in their homes, and accompany them for days at a time. Out 
of my revulsion the Lord planted His love.
—Leonard Bolton, China Call (1984), 64, 66–67.

[73] them, sit with them, sleep in their homes, and accompany them for days at a time. Out 
of my revulsion the Lord planted His love.
—Leonard Bolton, China Call (1984), 64, 66–67.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[74] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
RECOMMENDED READING
Agar, Grace C. “Tibetan Border of Kansu Province.” 1940. Typewritten.
Carlow, Margaret. The King’s Daughter: Jessie Wengler. Springfi  eld, Mo.: Foreign Missions Depart-
ment, n.d.
Cavaness, Barbara. “God Calling: Women in Assemblies of God Missions.” Pneuma: The Journal 
of the Society for Pentecostal Studies 16 (spring 1994): 49–62.
Derr, Paul K. “The Zamzam’s Last Voyage: 4 A/G Missionaries Rescued After Germans Sink 
Ship in 1941.” Assemblies of God Heritage (fall 1987): 3–6.
Johnson, Elva. Through Deepest Waters: Oren Munger. Springfi  eld, Mo.: Foreign Missions Depart-
ment of the Assemblies of God, n.d.
Kitch, Paul L. “The Days in a Lifeboat.” Assemblies of God Heritage 5 (winter 1985–86): 8–10.
McGee, Gary B. This Gospel Shall Be Preached: A History and Theology of Assemblies of God Foreign Mis-
sions. Vols. 1 and 2. Springfi  eld, Mo.: Gospel Publishing House, 1986, 1989.

[75] McGee, Gary B. This Gospel Shall Be Preached: A History and Theology of Assemblies of God Foreign Mis-
sions. Vols. 1 and 2. Springfi  eld, Mo.: Gospel Publishing House, 1986, 1989.
Stephany, Marie. The Power of the Gospel in Shansi Province. Springfi  eld, Mo.: Foreign Missions 
Department of the Assemblies of God, ca. 1934. 
Warner, Wayne E. “1945 Philippine Liberation Creates Emotional Scenes.” Assemblies of God 
Heritage 5 (spring 1985): 6–11.
———. “The Dramatic 1945 Liberation at Los Banos, Philippines.” Assemblies of God Heritage 5 
(summer 1985): 7–8, 10–11, 16.
———. “Missionaries Caught in the Crossfi re.” Assemblies of God Heritage 11 (winter 1991–1992): 
4–7, 9, 26–27.
———. “An American Missionary in Nazi Hands.” Parts 1–3. Assemblies of God Heritage 11 (win-
ter 1991–1992): 10–11, 27; 12 (spring 1992): 3–5, 24; 12 (summer 1992): 24–27.
Wengler, Jessie. Letters From Japan. Pasadena, Calif.: By the author, 1955.

[76] ter 1991–1992): 10–11, 27; 12 (spring 1992): 3–5, 24; 12 (summer 1992): 24–27.
Wengler, Jessie. Letters From Japan. Pasadena, Calif.: By the author, 1955.
Williams, Ralph D. “Night Bible School for Venezuela,” Key 3 (1966): 11.
Wilson, Everett A. “Identity, Community, and Status: The Legacy of the Central American 
Pentecostal Pioneers.” In Earthen Vessels: American Evangelicals and Foreign Missions, 1880–1980. 
Grand Rapids: William B. Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1990.
Wood, George O. “Their Last Full Measure.” Enrichment Journal (fall 1999): 66–71.
Zongo, Etienne. “Bible College Lectures on the History of the Assemblies of God in Burkina 
Faso.” D. Min. diss., Assemblies of God Theological Seminary, 2003.
224
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[77] 225
P
ioneering churches in the decades of the 1930s and 1940s required the same 
faith, stamina, and commitment that earlier Pentecostals had needed. Next 
to a highway on the outskirts of Little Rock, Arkansas, in 1933, evangelist Roy 
Gilliam started a revival “under a tree, with nothing but his Bible and a determina-
tion to go on. Things looked very gloomy but he did not give up.” Within months 
an Assemblies of God church had been established. District Superintendent David 
Burris preached on “The Foundation of Pentecost” at the fi  rst anniversary of the new 
congregation. For the saints who gathered on that occasion, it all fi  t together: Pente-
cost, grace, and grit.
The Pentecostal tradition in evangelism continued to thrive 
in the Assemblies of God: “We had no publicity chairman,” 
remembered Walter Higgins about his tent campaigns. “Nor did 
we hire an agency to announce our meetings. Our publicity was 
the Power of God in action. When the Lord began to work, some-

[78] remembered Walter Higgins about his tent campaigns. “Nor did 
we hire an agency to announce our meetings. Our publicity was 
the Power of God in action. When the Lord began to work, some-
body would get the Baptism, or some vile sinner became con-
verted, or a miracle of healing would take place, then we would 
let out a shout, and the crowds would come to see what was 
taking place.”
Over the years, the benefi  ts of cooperative fellowship became 
more apparent. The scope of ministries also enlarged to encompass Jews, Hispanics, 
Native Americans, and other language groups, as well as those who were deaf and 
blind. In 1934, Nick and Arvilla Sivonen began working among Native Americans in 
Washington State, “visiting numerous reservations as well as ministering . . . along the 
highways and rivers.” In addition to preaching and teaching, they distributed clothing, 
bedding, and doing “what we can to win the confi  dence of the Indian people.” To pro-

[79] highways and rivers.” In addition to preaching and teaching, they distributed clothing, 
bedding, and doing “what we can to win the confi  dence of the Indian people.” To pro-
vide them with proper housing, Evangel readers were asked to send offerings for the 
purchase of a “good lightweight house trailer.” Cooperation took many forms.
The diversity of ministries, personalities, and creative methods enriched the 
growth of the Assemblies of God. This chapter investigates the endeavors of sev-
eral individuals in different parts of the country who impacted the denomination in 
CHAPTER 13 
COOPERATIVE 
FELLOWSHIP
Walter Higgins
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[80] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
various ways. Baptized in the Spirit at the Azusa Street revival, Ernest S. Williams 
became a leading pastor in the General Council and served as its general superin-
tendent. In the north-central part of the United States, Frank J. Lindquist shaped 
much of the early history of the Minnesota and outlying districts and founded North 
Central Bible Institute in Minneapolis. Little known to people outside Ohio and West 
Virginia, Elva K. Stump and a band of friends sacrifi  ced to pioneer churches.
From Texas to Colorado, Demetrio Bazán, Sr., pioneered Hispanic congregations 
and later became superintendent of the Latin American District Council. Two prom-
inent evangelists from drastically different backgrounds are introduced: Edith Mae 
Pennington, a one-time beauty queen, and Anna B. Lock, a former drunkard and drug 
addict. William J. Mitchell, a seaman and drunkard whose life was transformed at con-

[81] Pennington, a one-time beauty queen, and Anna B. Lock, a former drunkard and drug 
addict. William J. Mitchell, a seaman and drunkard whose life was transformed at con-
version, did much to encourage the Pentecostal movement in New England. 
ERNEST S. WILLIAMS
(1885–1981)
William J. Seymour, the well-known leader of the Azusa Street revival, doubted 
whether Ernest Williams was made of “ministerial timber”; at least that was Williams’s 
interpretation of the look he got from Seymour when he told Seymour he “felt called 
to the ministry.” Whether an accurate interpretation or merely projection (Williams 
described himself as a “timid soul”), Williams proved to be an enduring leader.
His parents were devout members of the First Holiness Church, a Wesleyan-ho-
liness congregation in San Bernardino, California. Williams was working on a ranch 
in Colorado when his mother sent word about the Azusa Street revival in progress.

[82] liness congregation in San Bernardino, California. Williams was working on a ranch 
in Colorado when his mother sent word about the Azusa Street revival in progress. 
After arriving there in October 1906, he was baptized in the Spirit and called to the 
ministry. 
226
First Native American Convention
H
istory was made when the First Indian Convention ever to be held in the Assem-
blies of God convened early in February on the San Carlos Reservation in Arizona. 
The ﬁ  ve-day session brought together a large group of Apache Indians and missionar-
ies who are working among various tribes. In addition to the staff of Arizona missionar-
ies, a delegation came from Washington and Idaho. 
The blessings and beneﬁ  ts of the meetings were beyond description as the work-
ers and Indian Christians fellowshiped together in prayer and worship. What a joy to 
the missionaries to see the large company of Indians, cleansed by the blood of Christ

[83] ers and Indian Christians fellowshiped together in prayer and worship. What a joy to 
the missionaries to see the large company of Indians, cleansed by the blood of Christ 
and anointed by the Holy Spirit! Testimonies with true ring were given by the Indians, 
as well as the missionaries, some telling of their salvation experience, some relating 
marvelous healings, still others witnessing to being baptized with the Holy Spirit. In the 
course of the meetings, God graciously spoke through the Indians with other tongues, 
and interpretations were given. . . .
—“Our Home Frontiers,” Pentecostal Evangel (April 10, 1948): 10–11.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[84] He traveled as an evangelist for several years before marrying Laura Jacobson. 
They moved east, pastoring churches in Ohio, New York, New Jersey, and fi  nally in 
Pennsylvania. His ministry at Philadelphia’s Highway Mission Tabernacle began in 
1920, and the congregation grew rapidly. Williams began out-
door services in parks and on streets, utilizing a “gospel car” 
for a traveling platform and pulpit for the meetings. He added 
jail and hospital ministries, and encouraged a strong youth 
program. The tabernacle also had a thirty-piece orchestra 
that played at church services and street meetings. Crowds 
at the church grew until they had to enlarge the former Pres-
byterian church where they met. Williams was generous to 
those in need. On one occasion his wife remarked, “I have to 
hide the table money, or he would give it away to any person 
approaching him with a fi nancial need.”
Recognition of his leadership led to his election as an executive presbyter of the

[85] hide the table money, or he would give it away to any person 
approaching him with a fi nancial need.”
Recognition of his leadership led to his election as an executive presbyter of the 
Eastern district and fi nally as general superintendent of the Assemblies of God in 
1929. After twenty years of service in this capacity, he announced he would not be a 
candidate for reelection. 
Williams and other leaders kept a close eye on the General Council’s fi  nancial 
operation. Funds were always tight, and every dollar had to be carefully spent. He 
was particularly concerned about his stewardship of the “Lord’s money.” As he trav-
eled by train across the United States to speak in churches, conventions, and district 
councils, he never paid the additional fee for a sleeping compartment when traveling 
overnight. He preferred to sleep sitting up in the coach in order to save money. When 
traveling through Europe with Noel Perkin, the missionary secretary, to visit mission-

[86] overnight. He preferred to sleep sitting up in the coach in order to save money. When 
traveling through Europe with Noel Perkin, the missionary secretary, to visit mission-
aries, Williams charged Perkin to spend as little as possible on their meals. Perkin, 
however, knowing that Williams did not understand the currency transactions, made 
certain that they had a full meal at least once every day. When Williams wondered 
if the meal appeared to be too expensive, Perkin could still assure him that he was 
being frugal.
Momentous changes took place during his long administration. The lists of min-
isters, church members, and congregations more than tripled. New departments 
and programs emerged: national Christ’s Ambassadors (CA) Department, Speed the 
Light, national Sunday School Department, and Boys and Girls Missionary Crusade 
(BGMC). He also encouraged the development of the Radio Department and became

[87] Light, national Sunday School Department, and Boys and Girls Missionary Crusade 
(BGMC). He also encouraged the development of the Radio Department and became 
the speaker on the program Sermons in Song, fi  rst aired in 1946. The Assemblies of God 
entered the National Association of Evangelicals (1942), Pentecostal World Confer-
ence (1947), and the Pentecostal Fellowship of North America (1948). He played key 
roles in the founding of the last two organizations.
Over the years, Williams wrote extensively on doctrinal and devotional subjects. 
Many of his articles appeared in the Pentecostal Evangel, which also included his pop-
ular “Questions and Answers” column (a service to readers that had originated with 
COOPERATIVE FELLOWSHIP
227
 Ernest S. Williams
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[88] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
E. N. Bell). While remaining a popular speaker around the country after his retire-
ment, he taught for several years at Central Bible Institute (present-day Central Bible 
College). His classroom theology notes took form in his three-volume Systematic The-
ology, published in 1953.
This text added signifi  cantly to the doctrine books already printed by Gospel 
Publishing House, notably Peter Nelson’s Bible Doctrines (1934) and Myer Pearlman’s 
more extensive Knowing the Doctrines of the Bible (1937). Each one presented Pentecostal 
doctrine within the theological tradition of evangelicalism.
Thomas F. Zimmerman, an associate of Williams and later general superinten-
dent, commented that “it was characteristic of Brother Williams, that whenever a new 
situation presented itself, he would rise to the challenge and put his whole effort into 
the work.”
FRANK J. LINDQUIST
(1898–1989)
“The test of a leader is not what he can do himself, but what he can inspire other

[89] the work.”
FRANK J. LINDQUIST
(1898–1989)
“The test of a leader is not what he can do himself, but what he can inspire other 
men to do.” It was a motto Frank J. Lindquist lived by, and his achievements refl ected 
it. Raised in a predominantly Swedish-American community near Pittsburgh, Penn-
sylvania, the family held membership in the Evangelical Free Church. When Pente-
costal evangelists came to hold meetings in the community, the entire family and 
228
The Saints Declare
“Many a four-star general in God’s army, in the eyes of the saints down here, will 
leave the Judgment Seat of Christ as a ‘buck private’; and many a ‘buck private,’ in the 
eyes of the saints down here, will be revealed as a four-star general at the Judgment 
Seat of Christ. Man looketh on the outward appearance, but God looketh on the heart.”
—H. B. Kelchner, evangelist
“When preaching [Smith Wigglesworth] became entangled in long, involved sen-

[90] Seat of Christ. Man looketh on the outward appearance, but God looketh on the heart.”
—H. B. Kelchner, evangelist
“When preaching [Smith Wigglesworth] became entangled in long, involved sen-
tences. Then he would relieve our perplexity by speaking angelically in tongues which 
he always interpreted himself. It was all part of the sermon. Explain it how you will, 
there were some remarkable ﬂ  ashes of revelation.”
—Donald Gee, British Pentecostal leader
“At the present time the dictator of Italy [Benito Mussolini] is the head of ‘the con-
federation of the west’ [Daniel 7:23-25]. Whether or not he is the anti-Christ will never 
be known until the Holy Spirit, the great restrainer, is taken out of the world and the 
identity of the man of sin is ﬁ  nally revealed [2 Thessalonians 2:6-10].”
—Charles S. Price, evangelist and author of Mussolini: Is He the Anti-Christ?
“I know a lot of men preached that Mussolini was the anti-Christ. I wonder what 
those poor fellows are preaching now.”

[91] —Charles S. Price, evangelist and author of Mussolini: Is He the Anti-Christ?
“I know a lot of men preached that Mussolini was the anti-Christ. I wonder what 
those poor fellows are preaching now.”
—Jack Coe, evangelist
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[92] about thirty others from the congregation were baptized in the 
Spirit. Forced to leave their church, they rented an auditorium 
and began to hold Pentecostal services.
Inspired by the ministry of evangelist Ben Hardin, Lindquist 
and close friend James Menzie joined him in 1920 in conducting 
a tent revival in Gary, Indiana. A year later, the two young men set 
out for Minnesota, having been told by Hardin that it was one of 
the neediest areas for the gospel. Taking their tent from town to 
town, they planted new churches as they went. Their successes in 
evangelism, combined with those of others, led to the forming of 
the North Central district in 1922. Both received ordination at the inaugural meeting. 
The district encompassed fi  ve states: Wisconsin, Minnesota, (eastern) Montana, and 
North and South Dakota. When the fi  rst superintendent, C. M. Hanson, left offi ce a 
year later, Lindquist became the second and held the position for twenty-two years.

[93] North and South Dakota. When the fi  rst superintendent, C. M. Hanson, left offi ce a 
year later, Lindquist became the second and held the position for twenty-two years. 
But his longevity was not inspired by the perks. Like other district offi  cials of the 
time, he pastored a church, Minneapolis Gospel Tabernacle (1924–1967), due to the 
fi  nancial limitations of the district.
To the hats of pastor and district offi  cer, he added that of president in 1930, 
founding North Central Bible Institute (now North Central University) in the church 
basement. Seven years later they purchased the Asbury Hospital in downtown Min-
neapolis. Valued at $469,000, it was purchased for $125,000 during the Depression. 
Evangelist Watson Argue, Sr., visiting the school, observed: “It has been [my] privi-
lege to visit many Bible school buildings, but none has impressed [me] more than 
this: . . . spacious classrooms, reception rooms, libraries, offi  ces, dormitory rooms, an

[94] lege to visit many Bible school buildings, but none has impressed [me] more than 
this: . . . spacious classrooms, reception rooms, libraries, offi  ces, dormitory rooms, an 
elevator, and quarters for the Northern Gospel Publishing House.”
Although lacking formal ministerial training, Lindquist strongly supported it. 
But refl  ecting the long-standing tension between reliance on education and divine 
empowerment in one’s ministry, he told the students: “You’ve got to have more than 
a degree to go into the ministry. You’ve got to have an anointing. You’ve got to have 
a call of God. You must experience the anointing of the Holy Spirit in public, private, 
and family life.” 
No account of Frank Lindquist would be complete, however, without mention of 
his wife. Irene Gunhus had been converted and baptized in the Spirit during a Charles 
S. Price crusade at the Skating Arena in Minneapolis, an event that boosted atten-

[95] his wife. Irene Gunhus had been converted and baptized in the Spirit during a Charles 
S. Price crusade at the Skating Arena in Minneapolis, an event that boosted atten-
dance at the Gospel Tabernacle. Joining the congregation, she met Lindquist, and 
they were married in 1928. Irene was a major contributor to her husband’s ministry 
and took an active role in pastoring the church. 
ELVA K. STUMP
(1885–1985)
“Sister Stump” died at one hundred years of age in 1985, and her name appeared 
in an obituary list of ministers in the Pentecostal Evangel. But few in the General Council 
COOPERATIVE FELLOWSHIP
229
Frank J. Lindquist
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[96] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
recognized her name, and of those who did, probably most of them knew little of her 
remarkable ministry in Ohio and West Virginia. Like the vast majority of workers in 
the Lord’s vineyard, she died in relative obscurity. 
She was born Elva Klingler in Somerset, Ohio. Moving to 
the neighboring state of Pennsylvania, she enrolled in a nursing 
program at an Episcopal hospital in Philadelphia. She and her 
husband, Thomas, were members of the (“Dunkard”) Brethren 
Church. Although he never became a Pentecostal, after Elva was 
baptized in the Spirit he supported her call to the ministry. For 
this—not having his wife “in subjection” according to 1 Timothy 
2:11–12—the Brethren excommunicated him. 
During her pastorate of the Maple Avenue Mission in Canton, 
Ohio, in 1928, she testifi  ed to being healed one evening. She had 
been diagnosed with a terminal spinal infection and had taken to bed in an upstairs

[97] Ohio, in 1928, she testifi  ed to being healed one evening. She had 
been diagnosed with a terminal spinal infection and had taken to bed in an upstairs 
room of the home of friends. While downstairs they mourned that she wouldn’t make 
it through the night, Stump got out of bed and began to walk. “When they saw and 
heard [me and the nurse] walking and shouting and praising the Lord,” she wrote, 
“I guess it was something like the lame man at the gate who was healed. . . . The tele-
phone was kept busy that evening, witnessing and testifying. Many people came in, 
even until midnight, and joined us in our praises.”
In the midst of other responsibilities, Elva and Thomas found time to adopt and 
raise thirteen children. The number jumped from six to thirteen when the children’s 
home they directed near Canton closed. Because the last seven children could not be 
placed, the Stumps made them part of their family.

[98] home they directed near Canton closed. Because the last seven children could not be 
placed, the Stumps made them part of their family.
Elva Stump and a “Sister Coltharp” felt led of the Spirit on August 12, 1937, to 
plant a church in Shadybrook, a village on the outskirts of Weston in the mountains of 
West Virginia. Although the community had a public school, it had no church. Appar-
ently no one had been successful in establishing one there. Renting an unfi  nished 
second fl  oor area above a garage, they worked hard to get it ready for services. Eight 
days later, they began a Vacation Bible School and discovered that the children who 
came had little or no Christian training. At the fi  rst announced church service, seven-
teen people went to the altar for salvation. “The place was very crude,” Stump wrote 
to supporters, “but people came because a crucifi  ed risen savior was preached.”
As the weather turned colder in the autumn, they found larger and better quar-

[99] to supporters, “but people came because a crucifi  ed risen savior was preached.”
As the weather turned colder in the autumn, they found larger and better quar-
ters for the congregation. Except for time off at Christmas, the two women and visit-
ing preachers held evangelistic meetings every night (Tuesday to Sunday) for months 
at a time. Stump wrote that at the Shadybrook Gospel Mission of Weston, “we are 
holding up a high standard and people are cleaning up from their fi  lthy habits and 
being transformed by the power of God. Eight confessed to the use of tobacco and 
asked for prayer to be delivered. God answered prayer, delivered and fi  lled some of 
them with the Holy Ghost.” Before she resigned the church years later, it had grown 
to two hundred believers.
230
Elva K. Stump
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[100] Among others, she and “the Elliott Sisters, Bro. & Sis. Stewart, Bro. & Sis. Allison, 
Bro. Kirkpatrick, Bro. & Sis. Hart, Bro. & Sis. Berquist and Sis. Coltharp” made up the 
“Pioneer Mission Workers of West Virginia.” This loose-knit association worked within 
the Assemblies of God to evangelize the region. It is not known if all of them had 
ministerial credentials; Stump, however, had been ordained in (what was then) the 
Central District Council in 1934 at age forty-eight. 
Without formal fi  nancial backing from churches, they went to unchurched areas, 
holding “tent meetings, camp meetings, street meetings, jail services and opening 
new fi  elds.” In 1939 she reported, “We know what it is for the larder to be empty and 
[to] boil the potatoes and turnip peelings for soup and live on skimmed milk for 
three days, [to] not even have money to buy a postage stamp.” Finding an abandoned 
church, schoolhouse, or hall, they would begin holding revival meetings and Vacation

[101] three days, [to] not even have money to buy a postage stamp.” Finding an abandoned 
church, schoolhouse, or hall, they would begin holding revival meetings and Vacation 
Bible Schools. 
To train workers, they started their own Bible school. Still, more were needed: 
“Our greatest need is laborers, I say ‘sweaters,’ who are not afraid of the ‘summer’s 
noonday sun,’” she wrote. “Yes, there are opportunities on every hand. Calls come but 
COOPERATIVE FELLOWSHIP
231
Deutscher Zweig der Assemblies of God
T
he German Branch of the Assemblies of God (renamed German district in 1973) was 
formed in 1922 to meet the needs of German-speaking Pentecostals in the U.S. 
Hugo A. Ulrich, at the urging of E. N. Bell, invited fellow German-speaking pastors to 
New Castle, Pennsylvania, in November 1922 for the purpose of organizing the Ger-
man Branch. Seven of the sixteen participants hailed from Michigan; others were from

[102] New Castle, Pennsylvania, in November 1922 for the purpose of organizing the Ger-
man Branch. Seven of the sixteen participants hailed from Michigan; others were from 
Illinois, New Jersey, New York, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Wisconsin, and Canada. The scat-
tered German-speaking congregations overcame their isolation and worked together 
to effectively minister in their native tongue. 
By the 1930s, churches were added in California, Nebraska, North Dakota, South 
Dakota, and Washington. The German Branch and the Russian and Eastern European 
Mission (R.E.E.M.) jointly published Wort und Zeugnis (Word and Witness). The Ger-
man Branch began publishing a Sunday School quarterly in 1932. After the Assem-
blies of God and R.E.E.M. parted ways in 1940, the German Branch began publishing 
Licht und Leben (Light and Life) in 1942. Annual camp meetings were held in various 
churches and camps (including at Lake Odessa, Michigan) until the German Branch

[103] Licht und Leben (Light and Life) in 1942. Annual camp meetings were held in various 
churches and camps (including at Lake Odessa, Michigan) until the German Branch 
established Bethel Camp at Bridgman, Michigan, in 1944. The German Branch began 
sending missionaries in the 1930s, resulting in outreaches in Yugoslavia, Poland, India, 
Mexico, and a substantial work in Brazil. German Pentecostals in the U.S. and Canada 
maintained close fellowship. 
Like other immigrants, many German-speaking Pentecostals clung tenaciously to 
their culture and language. 
Over time, many German churches were Americanized and transferred to 
English-language districts. By the late 1970s, most German district churches had made 
the controversial choice to switch to English-language services.
—Darrin J. Rodgers
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[104] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
no one to go and [it’s] better not go than see souls born into the kingdom and left by 
the wayside to perish because there is no faithful pastor.”
Asked to explain why she could send only an offering of one dollar to head-
quarters for the renewal of her credentials in 1939, Stump assured the brethren in 
Springfi eld that she had not “spent money on fi  ne automobiles, pianos, fi ne clothes, 
[perms], jewelry and many other things that I  see in our Pentecostal ranks.” Then 
bringing the Word to bear on herself, and expressing the matter-of-fact pluck of a 
Pentecostal pioneer, she concluded: “But I hear Jesus say, ‘What is that to thee, follow 
thou me’ [John 21:22]. So I turn my eyes to Him and He supplies.”
DEMETRIO BAZÁN, SR. 
(1900–1976)
Demetrio Bazán was so admired by some Hispanic pastors that in addition to 
imitating his mannerisms and preaching, many began wearing crew cuts just like his.

[105] DEMETRIO BAZÁN, SR. 
(1900–1976)
Demetrio Bazán was so admired by some Hispanic pastors that in addition to 
imitating his mannerisms and preaching, many began wearing crew cuts just like his. 
Bazán’s legacy, however, rests on a stronger foundation than hero worship. Pastors 
respected him, for they knew that he shared their struggles. 
Born in Mexico in 1900, he was adopted 
at age nine by a well-to-do family who had 
no children of their own. This insured that 
he would receive an education. When the 
family later moved to Kingsville, Texas, he 
was converted under the ministry of Henry 
C. Ball, who discipled him in the faith. He 
married Manuelita (Nellie) Treviño in 1920, 
and both received ordination from the 
Assemblies of God. Afterward, they went to 
El Paso to work with Francisco Olazábal. 
Two years later, Bazán joined Olazábal and others in withdrawing from the 
Assemblies of God to form a competing organization. They had become frustrated

[106] El Paso to work with Francisco Olazábal. 
Two years later, Bazán joined Olazábal and others in withdrawing from the 
Assemblies of God to form a competing organization. They had become frustrated 
with the decision of the General Council’s leadership to delay the establishment of a 
Latin American district with Hispanic leaders. At a time when U.S. relations with Mex-
ico were severely strained due to recent American military intervention in Mexican 
affairs, emotions ran high. Ball, the leader of the “Mexican convention” of the Texico 
district, had to break the bad news of the delay; this triggered the separation. The 
Hispanics who remained (likely out of esteem for Ball) waited until 1939 before one 
of them took offi  ce as district superintendent of the Latin American district.
Bazán’s departure was brief, however, and he reaffi  liated a year later. After return-
ing, he pastored churches in Kingsville, Houston, and Denver, Colorado. When called

[107] Bazán’s departure was brief, however, and he reaffi  liated a year later. After return-
ing, he pastored churches in Kingsville, Houston, and Denver, Colorado. When called 
to pastor in Denver, he lacked any promise of funds for food and clothing. Further-
more, he didn’t know where his large family of nine would stay once they arrived. 
They went with only the address of someone living in Denver who knew a member of 
their former congregation in San Antonio. Upon arriving, they met José Arroyo, who 
232
 Manuelita and Demetrio Bazán
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[108] immediately told them, “I have the house for you to live in.” He told them that he had 
been led by a dream to contact the owner of a certain house. With his consent, the 
Bazáns set up housekeeping. 
The honor of being the fi  rst Hispanic superintendent of the Latin American 
district fell to Bazán himself in 1939. His contributions to the district included its 
restructuring, recommending the formation of the Spanish Eastern district (originally 
with Puerto Rico), and training. Many pastors received their only formal instruction in 
Scripture and doctrine from the ministers’ institutes he conducted in various places. 
Bazán’s concern for the welfare of the ministers and their families led him to have the 
new Social Security Act (1935) translated into Spanish in order for them to enroll and 
understand the benefi ts.
EDITH MAE PENNINGTON
(1902–1974)
Voted “Most Beautiful Girl in the U.S.” by the judges in a national competition

[109] understand the benefi ts.
EDITH MAE PENNINGTON
(1902–1974)
Voted “Most Beautiful Girl in the U.S.” by the judges in a national competition 
in 1921, Edith Mae Patterson became a celebrity overnight. This award transformed 
the young schoolteacher from Pine Bluff, Arkansas, into a beauty queen and led her 
to Hollywood for a promising career in motion pictures. It was the Roaring Twenties 
COOPERATIVE FELLOWSHIP
233
My Trip to the Holy Land
T
hey called for everybody [on the ship] to register. You were to register what State 
you were from, your occupation, your business on this trip, and so forth. I registered 
as a “Pente costal evangelist,” and the purser on the boat said, “A—a what?” I told him. 
He said, “What does that stand for?” “We’re Full Gospel folks,” I replied. He said, “What 
do you mean by ‘Full Gospel folks’?” I said, “We believe in salvation holiness, the soon 
coming of the Lord, Divine healing, and the baptism in the Holy Ghost.” Every body was

[110] do you mean by ‘Full Gospel folks’?” I said, “We believe in salvation holiness, the soon 
coming of the Lord, Divine healing, and the baptism in the Holy Ghost.” Every body was 
listening, but nothing stayed with them except the words, “divine healing.” After we 
had registered I went back up [on deck]. Pretty soon they had to lead me to my room. 
I was deathly sick. I was in my room for about two hours with my ﬁ  rst hard seasickness. 
It makes you so sick that you do not want to see anybody. There came a knock at the 
door. Mr. Graham said, “Mrs. Taylor, my wife is awfully sick. Didn’t you say you believe 
in divine healing?” I said, “Yes sir.” 
He said, “Will you come and pray for her?”
I thought if it were anything else but seasickness! I tried to look pleasant; I did not 
want her to see I was seasick. I went in, and without an introduction said, “O God, touch 
her! Heal her.” My eyes began to draw shut, and something caused me to get up. I said,

[111] want her to see I was seasick. I went in, and without an introduction said, “O God, touch 
her! Heal her.” My eyes began to draw shut, and something caused me to get up. I said, 
“I’ll be back.” I went back to my room—and for about three and a half hours in came 
the sick calls! And the devil said, “Physician, heal thyself. Why don’t you do something 
for yourself?” I said, “I’m too sick to pray for myself. The reason I prayed for the other 
folks was because I had to!”
—Evangelist Emma Taylor, “My Trip to the Holy Land,” 
Pentecostal Evangel (July 11, 1936): 8–9.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[112] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
in America, and the dazzling lights of Hollywood enticed many young women, who 
would have given anything for the opportunity handed Edith. 
Although she enjoyed the limelight for a time, she became disillusioned with 
the glitzy lifestyle and the lack of moral values in what she came to see as a modern 
Sodom. “What is wrong with me?” she asked her mother. “Most young girls would 
be thrilled with all these honors and publicity, to have their names in electric lights, 
newspaper write-ups, et cetera. Mother, why am I not happy?” Finding only empti-
ness, she began to read her Bible and fi  nally severed her contact with Hollywood. 
Sometime after, she knelt at an old-fashioned altar in a Pentecostal church in Okla-
homa City and surrendered her life to Christ: “The Light from the Cross exceeded 
the bright lights of the stage. I exchanged the glamour of the world for the glory of 
the Cross. I pledged my irrevocable word 
to Christ to forsake all and follow Him.”

[113] the bright lights of the stage. I exchanged the glamour of the world for the glory of 
the Cross. I pledged my irrevocable word 
to Christ to forsake all and follow Him.” 
The turnabout brought an end to her 
marriage with her business manager, J. 
B. Pennington, who wanted nothing to 
do with her faith. 
Later baptized in the Spirit, she 
heard the call to preach and received 
ordination from the Arkansas-Louisi-
ana district in 1930. For the next twenty 
years, Pennington became a highly suc-
cessful evangelist and then pastor in Shreveport, Louisiana. Her celebrity status and 
decision to forsake the lights of Hollywood for ministry on the sawdust trail captured 
the interest of newspapers across the country, which retold her story and highlighted 
her meetings. Reporters eagerly sought for interviews and pictures. 
Another aspect of Pennington’s fame came from her calling as a female 
preacher. Although the General Council had earlier given credentials to women as

[114] Another aspect of Pennington’s fame came from her calling as a female 
preacher. Although the General Council had earlier given credentials to women as 
evangelists and missionaries, ordination as pastors didn’t come until 1935. Many 
questioned the place of females in the pulpit, except when a male minister was 
not available. This artifi  cial difference couldn’t last, for too many women had been 
active in ministry from the beginning of the Assemblies of God, and few could deny 
the fruit of their labors. In regard to the outpouring of the Spirit on men and women 
(Acts 2:16–18), she demanded: “If God calls a woman to preach the gospel, and His 
blessings are upon her, ‘in confi  rming His Word with signs following,’ whose right is 
it to question her right to preach the gospel, pastor a church, or lead a movement 
under God?”
ANNA B. LOCK
(1890–1952)
“Now I  lay me down to sleep, I  pray the Lord my soul to keep” was the only

[115] it to question her right to preach the gospel, pastor a church, or lead a movement 
under God?”
ANNA B. LOCK
(1890–1952)
“Now I  lay me down to sleep, I  pray the Lord my soul to keep” was the only 
prayer that Anna B. Lock could remember. Trapped in a sinful lifestyle and chemically 
234
Advertisement for services with  Edith Mae Pennington 
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[116] addicted, she recited this in moments of great loneliness and despair; there were 
many such times. She knew that Jesus had died on the cross, but didn’t know how to 
get saved. No one ever invited her to church—good and upstanding people would 
have fl  inched at the sight of her entering their church.
Like other children growing up in the home of an alcoholic parent, she had more 
than one strike against her. When her father brought his buddies home and mixed 
drinks for them, he gave Anna whiskey to drink 
when she asked for it. She was only seven or eight 
years old. 
Her mother took the children to Sunday 
School, but had to endure the curses of her hus-
band. Added to other abuses, she fi  nally left the 
faith and moved to another town to rear her chil-
dren in safety. Unfortunately, it was too late for 
Anna. At fourteen years, she had already become 
an alcoholic and left home. Two years later, she 
gave birth to a baby girl out of wedlock and left her

[117] Anna. At fourteen years, she had already become 
an alcoholic and left home. Two years later, she 
gave birth to a baby girl out of wedlock and left her 
in the care of family members. Anna was in the fast 
lane to a dead end—skid row.
Never able to keep a job, Lock drifted to Los 
Angeles and then to San Francisco. While in Califor-
nia, she nearly died several times from her drinking 
and drug overdoses. By the time she came into con-
tact with the Salvation Army, her weight had dropped from 163 pounds to 107 pounds. 
The Army helped arrange for her return home to Illinois. At long last, she was reunited 
with her daughter, mother, and older sister. For a time, she managed to keep away from 
liquor and drugs. During this time, she married and promised her husband that she 
would remain off drugs. Her drinking, however, resumed. “I made home brew by 20-gal-
lon lots and drank it the same way,” she wrote. “My husband furnished a lovely home

[118] would remain off drugs. Her drinking, however, resumed. “I made home brew by 20-gal-
lon lots and drank it the same way,” she wrote. “My husband furnished a lovely home 
for me but I didn’t take care of it. All I wanted was drink and cigarettes.”
When her aunt arrived for a visit in 1931, she encouraged Lock to attend a revival 
at a local Pentecostal church. Finding herself strangely drawn to the meetings, she 
attended almost nightly for two weeks. One night, sinners were invited to the altar 
while the congregation sang:
I’ve wandered far away from God,
 Now I’m coming home.
The paths of sin too long I’ve trod,
 Lord, I’m coming home.
Approaching her, one of the preachers put her arm around Lock and said, “Jesus 
loves you. He needs you.” 
COOPERATIVE FELLOWSHIP
235
 Anna B. Lock
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[119] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
Moments later Lock went to the altar and wept in repentance. “O God, I’ve been 
so wicked and low,” she prayed. “Could You do anything with a wreck like me? Here 
I am, Lord. If You’ll forgive me, I’ll live the rest of my life for You.”
Then began a remarkable change in her life: She led her family to the Lord, and 
two years after her conversion, she began pioneering a church there in Galva, Illinois. 
It began meeting in the basement of the post offi  ce, and within six years grew to a 
congregation of eighty people. Understanding the needs of the poor during these 
Depression years, she organized a sewing circle to make clothes. The services at the 
Galva Assembly were marked by preaching, “shouting, singing, and dancing in the 
Spirit.” At the annual Illinois district camp meetings, “[Lock] could always be seen on 
the platform with her tambourine and usually led at least one ‘Jericho March’ during 
the meetings.”

[120] Spirit.” At the annual Illinois district camp meetings, “[Lock] could always be seen on 
the platform with her tambourine and usually led at least one ‘Jericho March’ during 
the meetings.”
In the late l930s, she felt led to become an itinerant evangelist and journeyed 
across North America holding services and sharing her testimony. Even with only a 
third-grade education and no formal ministerial training, her campaigns led to many 
conversions and Spirit baptisms. In addition, she frequently went to Chicago’s skid 
row to evangelize on the streets and in the bars. “It takes no more of His precious 
blood to cleanse a poor, drunken, cigarette-smoking, dope-using sinner,” she wrote, 
“than it does the haughty, high-minded, stiff-necked church member who has a form 
of godliness, but denies the power thereof.” 
Her own dramatic conversion provided her with a special understanding of the 
transforming power of God’s love: “[Jesus] lifted me from the underworld and pre-

[121] Her own dramatic conversion provided her with a special understanding of the 
transforming power of God’s love: “[Jesus] lifted me from the underworld and pre-
pared me for the upperworld.” Often Lock would begin the process for her converts in 
a similar fashion, removing them from skid row and taking them home to live with her 
family until they were able to stand on their own feet as Christians.
236
I Listened to Myself Preach
I
n 1922, I was in my ﬁ  rst pastorate at Puxico, Missouri, which is in the southeastern 
part of the state. I was a real novice in the ministry, pastoring a small congregation in 
a town of only 700.
Evangelist Maria B. Woodworth-Etter was at that time closing out an outstanding 
ministry. I had read a lot about her but had never been in one of her meetings. When 
I heard that she would be conducting services in Sikeston, I told one of the women in 
the church that I would like to attend a service and hear Sister Etter preach.

[122] I heard that she would be conducting services in Sikeston, I told one of the women in 
the church that I would like to attend a service and hear Sister Etter preach.
I didn’t have a car at that time, but the woman in the church told me her sister had 
a car and would be happy to take us.
When we walked into the open-air meeting at Sikeston, we looked at the biggest 
church crowd we had ever seen. I thought it looked like 10,000 people, but it was prob-
ably more like a thousand.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[123] COOPERATIVE FELLOWSHIP
237
Before the service started, several people on the platform 
were talking with Sister Etter. We learned later that the song 
leader’s mother had died so he had gone to the funeral. They 
were looking for a song leader.
Soon a woman on the platform walked into the audience and 
came straight toward my wife and me. We then discovered 
that we knew the woman.
She said, “Brother Aaron, Mrs. Etter wants 
you to come to the platform.”
But I didn’t think I belonged on the platform. The 
woman insisted, so I went. After I met Sister Etter, they 
asked me to lead the singing. I answered that I had never 
led a song service for such a big congregation. I hadn’t 
been preaching very long, and the crowds at Puxico were 
very small compared to this one.
Mrs. Etter answered my objection. “You’ll do all right. 
The Lord will help you.”
With fear and trembling I accepted the responsibility 
and talked with Sister Etter about the type of songs 
she wanted.

[124] The Lord will help you.”
With fear and trembling I accepted the responsibility 
and talked with Sister Etter about the type of songs 
she wanted.
After I had led a verse of the ﬁ  rst song and was into the second verse, I felt a light 
tap on my shoulder. It was Mrs. Etter. She said, “Brother, the Lord would have you 
preach here tonight.”
I was stunned. I had reluctantly accepted the invitation to lead the song service. 
Now Sister Etter wanted me to preach!
I went on with the singing and got into the second song. I felt that little tap on my 
shoulder again. This time Sister Etter was more forceful. “Brother, don’t fail God. He 
wants you to preach here tonight.”
I hardly knew what to say. I had come to hear this great woman preach, and now 
she was asking me, a novice, to preach to this huge crowd.
I ﬁ  nished the song service and sat down.
When the time came for me to preach, I had decided I would preach along the line

[125] she was asking me, a novice, to preach to this huge crowd.
I ﬁ  nished the song service and sat down.
When the time came for me to preach, I had decided I would preach along the line 
I had preached the previous Sunday night in my church—on the coming of the Lord.
But the Holy Spirit had other plans.
After Sister Etter announced that I would be speaking, I stood to my feet and 
walked toward the pulpit. I had only taken a few steps when suddenly a passage from 
the 5th chapter of John ﬂ  ashed through my mind: “Wilt thou be made whole?”
I took the passage for my text, and the Spirit of God preached that whole sermon 
through me. I really listened to myself preach. God moved through the audience in a 
miraculous manner.
It wasn’t me. It was the Holy Spirit. I was just a young preacher and didn’t know 
how to handle a crowd like this one. The Spirit moved!
That service has been one of the mountain peaks of my Christian experience.

[126] how to handle a crowd like this one. The Spirit moved!
That service has been one of the mountain peaks of my Christian experience. 
—Aaron A. Wilson, “A Mountain Peak of My Spiritual Experience” 
Assemblies of God Heritage 4 (winter 1984–85):12.
 Aaron A. Wilson
I Listened to Myself Preach, continued
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[127] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
WILLIAM J. MITCHELL 
(1878–1958)
The testimony of many Pentecostals who entered the ministry involved several 
common ingredients: salvation, healing or deliverance from a chemical addiction, 
Spirit baptism, and a divine call to evangelism. Pentecostals believed this made up 
for whatever shortcomings one might have had in upbringing, education, or social 
graces. William J. Mitchell, born and reared in Newfoundland in eastern Canada, left 
school while in the third grade and went to sea as a cabin boy at eleven. It was far 
from a promising start.
Sailing around the world with hard-drink-
ing crews, he became an alcoholic while still a 
young man. Desperate to overcome his addic-
tion, according to his son, Allen, once Mitchell 
even made a “blood vow,” cutting his wrist and 
“then writing in his own blood, he vowed never 
to drink again. But it was to no avail.”
In 1900 he met and married Susanna Patience 
Curnew in St. John’s, New foundland, and a year

[128] “then writing in his own blood, he vowed never 
to drink again. But it was to no avail.”
In 1900 he met and married Susanna Patience 
Curnew in St. John’s, New foundland, and a year 
later, she gave birth to the fi  rst of their thirteen 
children. Following the large migration of New-
foundlanders to New England and especially to 
Massachusetts, the Mitchells settled in Chelsea, 
where he began work as a carpenter. After the birth 
of their second daughter, they discovered that she 
had epilepsy, so they moved to Zion City, Illinois, 
noted for John Alexander Dowie’s healing ministry. 
The timing of Mitchell’s salvation and the move were very close. The Zion saints prayed 
for the girl, and she never again experienced a seizure. The family remained there until 
1905, when Dowie had a stroke and the community entered a period of turmoil.
Returning to Chelsea, Mitchell started an independent mission on Park Street in

[129] 1905, when Dowie had a stroke and the community entered a period of turmoil.
Returning to Chelsea, Mitchell started an independent mission on Park Street in 
a former saloon. When news of the Pentecostal outpouring began to circulate in New 
England, he sent out an appeal for workers who had experienced speaking in tongues 
according to Acts 2:4 to visit them. Several responded, including two women, Mabel 
Smith and Jean Campbell (and possibly Charles F. Parham himself). Smith and Camp-
bell had been baptized in the Spirit during the Pentecostal revival in Zion City under 
Parham’s ministry. An outpouring of the Spirit in Chelsea, however, eluded them. But 
when Brother and Sister Sankey Lee came from Texas in the spring of 1907, Mitchell 
and others were baptized in the Spirit. After the Lees departed, Mitchell said, “I con-
tinued to carry on the meetings the rest of the year, besides working at my trade as

[130] and others were baptized in the Spirit. After the Lees departed, Mitchell said, “I con-
tinued to carry on the meetings the rest of the year, besides working at my trade as 
a carpenter. The news spread that the Lord was blessing, so that people came from 
everywhere, making it necessary for us to move into a larger building.”
238
 Susanna and William Mitchell
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[131] COOPERATIVE FELLOWSHIP
239
A Few Hints to Preachers
M
ake no apologies. If you 
have the Lord’s mes-
sage, deliver it; if not, hold 
your peace. Have [a] short 
preface or introduction. Say 
your best things ﬁ  rst, and stop 
before you get prosey. Do not 
spoil the appetite for dinner 
by too much thin soup. Leave 
self out of the pulpit and take 
Jesus in....
If you do not want to 
“‘break,” make your shirt col-
lar an inch larger, and give 
your blood a chance to ﬂ  ow 
back to the heart. Don’t get 
excited too soon. Do not run 
away from your hearers. Engine driving-wheels ﬂ  y fast with no load, but when 
they draw anything they go slower.
Do not scold the people. Do not abuse the faithful souls who come to 
meeting [on] rainy days, because of the others who do not come. Preach the 
best to small congregations. Jesus preached to one woman at the well, and 
she got all Samaria out to hear Him next time.
Do not repeat, saying, “‘as I said before.” If you said it before, say some-

[132] best to small congregations. Jesus preached to one woman at the well, and 
she got all Samaria out to hear Him next time.
Do not repeat, saying, “‘as I said before.” If you said it before, say some-
thing else after. Leave out words you cannot deﬁ  ne. Stop your declamation 
and talk to folks. Come down from stilted and sacred tones, and become a lit-
tle child. Change the subject, if it goes hard. Do not tire yourself and every one 
else out. Do not preach till the middle of your sermon buries the beginning, 
and is buried in the end. Look the people in the face, and live so that you are 
not afraid of them.
Take long breaths, ﬁ  ll your lungs and keep them full. Stop to breathe 
before the air is exhausted. Then you will not ﬁ  nish each sentence-ah, with a 
terrible gasp-ah, and so strain the lungs-ah, as if you were dying for air-ah, and 
never ﬁ  nd it out-ah, because their friends dare not tell them-ah, and so leave

[133] terrible gasp-ah, and so strain the lungs-ah, as if you were dying for air-ah, and 
never ﬁ  nd it out-ah, because their friends dare not tell them-ah, and so leave 
them to make sport of the Philistines-ah. Inﬂ  ate your lungs. It is easier to run 
a mill with a full pond than an empty one. Be moderate at ﬁ  rst. Hoist the gate 
a little way; when you are half through, raise a little more; when nearly done, 
put on a full head of water.
Aim at the mark. Hit it. Shoot, and see where the shot struck, and then ﬁ re 
another broadside. Pack your sermons, make your words like bullets.
—Burt McCafferty, “A Few Hints to Preachers,” 
Weekly Evangel (January 27, 1917): 7.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[134] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
As the revival continued, participants started new missions in different parts of 
New England. This dispersion was reinforced by the great Chelsea fi  re of 1908, in 
which half the city—including Mitchell’s mission and all the family’s possessions—
was destroyed. 
Providing for such a large family was no small task. When Mitchell started Glad 
Tidings Tabernacle in Everett, Massachusetts, he continued working at his trade to 
increase his income. However, it also gave him valuable contact with other men on 
the job. One acquaintance remembered: “Many of his parishioners were carpenters, 
painters and iron workers. Hence, he had contact with them during working days 
and situations. He . . . was the example which led so many of them to salvation and 
membership in the church.”
His reputation for evangelism, church planting, and prayer led to his election in 
1936 as superintendent of the New England District Council. Mitchell served in this

[135] membership in the church.”
His reputation for evangelism, church planting, and prayer led to his election in 
1936 as superintendent of the New England District Council. Mitchell served in this 
capacity for two years. Throughout his ministry, he kept contact with other Pentecos-
tals in the region as well, including Christine Gibson, founder of Zion Bible Institute 
in Rhode Island. The advance of Pentecostalism in New England is part of the legacy 
of William Mitchell and other pioneers who believed the reports about the outpour-
ing of the Spirit, experienced it for themselves, and declared it to others.
RECOMMENDED READING
Bazán, Demetrio, Sr. Autobiographia de Demetrio Bazán. Unpublished ms., 1975.
Bazan, Nellie. Enviados de Dios: Demetrio Y Nellie Bazan. Miami, FL: Editorial Vida, 1987.
Blumhofer, Edith. “The Role of Women in the Assemblies of God.” Assemblies of God Heritage 7 
(winter 1987–1988): 13–17.

[136] Blumhofer, Edith. “The Role of Women in the Assemblies of God.” Assemblies of God Heritage 7 
(winter 1987–1988): 13–17.
Gohr, Glenn. “Ben Hardin: A Man with a Heart for Evangelism.” Assemblies of God Heritage 15 
(winter 1995–1996): 7–11, 23.
———. “A Dedicated Ministry Among Hispanics: Demetrio and Nellie Bazán.” Assemblies of God 
Heritage 9 (fall 1989): 7–9, 17.
———. “A Harvest in Minnesota: The Story of A/G Pioneer Frank J. Lindquist.” Assemblies of God 
Heritage 10 (spring 1990): 10–13.
Janes, Burton K. “William J. Mitchell: A Pentecostal Pioneer in New England.” Parts 1 and 2. 
Assemblies of God Heritage 12 (winter 1992–1993): 10–12, 24–25; 13 (spring 1993): 22–24, 33–34.
Lock, Anna B. “From the Underworld to the Upperworld.” Assemblies of God Heritage 14 (summer 
1994): 19–21.
Pennington, Edith Mae. From the Footlights to the Light of the Cross. Shreveport, La.: Plant of 
Renown, n.d.
———. Should Women Preach the Gospel? Shreveport, La.: Plant of Renown, 1982.

[137] Pennington, Edith Mae. From the Footlights to the Light of the Cross. Shreveport, La.: Plant of 
Renown, n.d.
———. Should Women Preach the Gospel? Shreveport, La.: Plant of Renown, 1982.
Stump, Elva K. “A Miracle of Healing.” Assemblies of God Heritage 14 (spring 1994): 14–15.
Saggio, Joseph J., and Jim Dempsey. American Indian College: A Witness to the Tribes. Springfi eld, 
MO: Gospel Publishing House, 2008.
Warner, Wayne. “From the Footlights to the Light of the Cross: The Story of Evangelist Edith 
Mae Pennington.” Assemblies of God Heritage 7 (winter 1987–1988): 6–9, 20.
240
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[138] 241
I
n late summer 1930, William I. Evans, the “principal” of Central Bible Institute 
(CBI) announced that the school year would begin on September 26, and there 
was still room for more students. “We are looking for Jesus to come and, in conse-
quence of that glorious event, we may never conduct the [term],” he remarked. “We 
thank God for the blessed hope. . . . However, we are occupying till He comes. That 
occupation with us is making this Institute count for the very most in the advance-
ment of the Kingdom.” The school preferred mature and “diligent students of the 
Word,” nineteen years of age and older. Accepting applicants below this age might 
mean that at graduation three years later, they could still be “too young to be trusted 
with the responsibilities involved.”
Evans lamented that fi  nding students with the “highest type of consecration 
among us is getting rarer.” Life at a Bible institute contrasted sharply with campus

[139] Evans lamented that fi  nding students with the “highest type of consecration 
among us is getting rarer.” Life at a Bible institute contrasted sharply with campus 
life at colleges and universities. Preeminently an experience in spiritual formation, it 
demanded a high level of dedication to stay the course.
The “standards of holiness” required separation from worldly values. “It grieves 
our hearts and we could weep,” he added in disappointment, “when we see world 
conformity among Bible school graduates!” Women especially seem to have been 
the culprits: “We have seen pastors’ wives and lady pastors and leaders dressed so 
much like the world as to show no line of separation.” Hence, “short skirts, low necks, 
sheer clothes, adornments, and worldly style of hair dress, are inexcusable. Certainly 
religion does not consist in what we wear, but genuine religion of the kind we profess 
will show itself in these matters.” Hopefully, “only . . . serious-minded youths will

[140] religion does not consist in what we wear, but genuine religion of the kind we profess 
will show itself in these matters.” Hopefully, “only . . . serious-minded youths will 
care to apply themselves to [the school’s] rigor.” 
Although strict discipline characterized all the schools, the atmosphere could 
hardly be described as dull or without humor. Instead, both students and faculty 
members shared a common commitment for the evangelization of the world. Refl ect-
ing the desire of church leaders and grassroots believers alike, Evans pleaded, “We 
want all its facilities from walls and roof to the services of consecrated instructors to 
produce the very utmost in lives for the Kingdom.”
CHAPTER 14 
TEACHING
THE SAINTS
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[141] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
Alumni from Assemblies of God schools often recall classroom instructors who 
profoundly impacted their lives. Since these institutions were ventures of faith, fac-
ulty members worked long hours, struggled with low pay, and frequently received lit-
tle recognition for their sacrifi cial efforts. In a report published in the Pentecostal Evan-
gel about the 1937 commencement at Latin American Bible Institute in San Antonio 
and the thirty-fi  ve men and women who graduated, the writer attributed the success 
of the school to the sacrifi  ces of the staff: “Much credit is due to Brother Ball and the 
group of workers who have been assisting him as teachers in the school, since funds 
have never been very plentiful so as to enable anyone to be really remunerated for 
his services; but each has given his time and effort willingly as unto the Lord, trusting 
God for the supply of his individual needs.”

[142] his services; but each has given his time and effort willingly as unto the Lord, trusting 
God for the supply of his individual needs.”
Most churches did not fi  nancially support these schools for several reasons: 
First, they sometimes preferred spending their monies on local church ministries 
and/or foreign missions. Second, a long-standing fear of educational preparation 
made many wary of Bible institutes. Third, since the schools operated on faith, God 
would somehow provide for them; indeed, strong fi  nancial backing might jeopardize 
their spiritual vigor. Despite the handicaps that worked against their effectiveness, 
teachers contributed heavily to the spiritual formation of thousands of pastors, evan-
gelists, missionaries, and other church workers.
242
Classes Start at LABI
I
n about a month the Latin-American Bible Institute in Saspamco, Texas, will open its 
doors again for another school year. From all along the Mexican border and also from

[143] 242
Classes Start at LABI
I
n about a month the Latin-American Bible Institute in Saspamco, Texas, will open its 
doors again for another school year. From all along the Mexican border and also from 
several states of this country, young men and women will gather in for another year 
of study and training for the ministry among their own Spanish-speaking people. Year 
after year the institute turns out Spirit-ﬁ  lled and trained workers who are doing effec-
tive work in bringing the gospel to the Latin-American ﬁ elds.
The Bible Institute is located on a large farm near Saspamco, where the students 
help with the raising of produce for the table as well as feed for the cows 
Classes Start at LABI Continued
and pigs. Mr. Einar Peterson, a worker in the institute, has just been visiting the 
Missions Department. From him we learn that the school will be opening under a seri-
ous handicap this fall in that there are no crops this year because of drought. The same

[144] Missions Department. From him we learn that the school will be opening under a seri-
ous handicap this fall in that there are no crops this year because of drought. The same 
condition at the homes of the students will prevent many of them from coming to school 
unless funds can be provided from some other source.
As we bring this urgent need before our Evangel readers, we trust the Lord will 
lay it upon some hearts to help, for we believe that funds invested in the school will 
yield good dividends in the Kingdom of God. Offerings may be sent to the Foreign Mis-
sions Department, 336 West Paciﬁ  c Street, Springﬁ  eld, Missouri, designated for the 
Latin-American Bible Institute in care of H. C. Ball. They would also be grateful for farm 
produce or canned goods sent direct to the Latin-American Bible Institute, Post Oﬃ  ce 
Box 113, Saspamco, Texas.
—“Missionary School Opening,” Pentecostal Evangel (September 23, 1939): 8.

[145] produce or canned goods sent direct to the Latin-American Bible Institute, Post Oﬃ  ce 
Box 113, Saspamco, Texas.
—“Missionary School Opening,” Pentecostal Evangel (September 23, 1939): 8.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[146] Educators presented in this chapter include Peter C. Nelson, Myer Pearlman, 
Marcus L. Grable, Christine Gibson, and Stanley H. Frodsham. Gibson, founder of 
the independent Zion Bible Institute in Rhode Island, never held credentials with the 
General Council. Yet hundreds of Assemblies of God ministers received their training 
there; her story deserves to be told. Stanley H. Frodsham, long-time editor of the 
Pentecostal Evangel, has also been included. While he did some teaching at CBI, his 
contributions lie in his editorial work and many books. Through these means, he 
contributed to ministerial preparation formally and informally. Many who couldn’t 
attend the Bible institutes depended on the Evangel for instruction, sermon ideas, 
and Sunday School lessons.
PETER C. NELSON
(1868–1942)
Generally, Pentecostals looked down on academic degrees as more of a hindrance 
than help for Spirit-fi  lled ministry. For example, one early Council leader recalled,

[147] PETER C. NELSON
(1868–1942)
Generally, Pentecostals looked down on academic degrees as more of a hindrance 
than help for Spirit-fi  lled ministry. For example, one early Council leader recalled, 
“the use of ‘big’ words was gen-
erally detested. The preachers 
were never called ‘Reverend.’ 
Everybody was brother and sister 
so and so. D.D. [doctor of divin-
ity] was invariably interpreted to 
mean ‘Dumb Dogs’ [Isaiah 56:10, 
KJV].”
“P . C.” Nelson, however, knew 
the value of formal preparation 
for ministry. An American Baptist 
pastor who became a Pentecostal 
in 1920, he had graduated from 
Denison University in Ohio and 
studied under one of America’s foremost theologians, Augustus H. Strong, at the 
Rochester (New York) Theological Seminary. Yet such training had not been an easy 
thing for him to acquire.
Nelson’s family migrated to Iowa from Denmark. At twenty he felt called to the 
ministry, but his early attempts at preaching were so discouraging that he renounced

[148] thing for him to acquire.
Nelson’s family migrated to Iowa from Denmark. At twenty he felt called to the 
ministry, but his early attempts at preaching were so discouraging that he renounced 
his call and he despaired spiritually. “The diffi  culties and ridicule to which [I] was 
subjected were too heavy for [me] to bear alone,” he wrote, “being without a spiritual 
adviser, and without anyone to encourage [me] to go forward.” This proved to be the 
darkest time in his life: “All hope of Heaven being gone, [I] wandered in darkness, in 
the blackest darkness.”
Morning dawned at last, however, when he met J.F. Bryant in 1888, a Baptist pas-
tor in Harland, Iowa. Although Nelson thought he had committed the unpardonable 
sin against the Holy Spirit (Matthew 12:31), his faith and calling were renewed under 
TEACHING THE SAINTS
243
Peter C. Nelson

[149] sin against the Holy Spirit (Matthew 12:31), his faith and calling were renewed under 
TEACHING THE SAINTS
243
Peter C. Nelson
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[150] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
Bryant’s infl  uence. Enrolling at a Baptist seminary in the Chicago area a year later, he 
found that without an undergraduate degree he was not prepared, so he switched to 
Denison University in Ohio. To cover his expenses, he worked as a manual laborer. 
While there he met his wife, Myrtle Garmong, who then helped him complete the 
program (in seven years).
Still feeling unprepared, he enrolled at Rochester Seminary in 1899. Augustus 
H. Strong, the president and professor of theology, taught the courses in systematic 
theology, and Nelson became one of his students. Strong’s Systematic Theology, fi  rst 
published in 1886, had gone through seven editions and reached nearly twelve hun-
dred pages by the time he got there. “I have discarded none of the Baptist  doctrines,” 
he reminisced many years later, “but have built a story or two on the good solid foun-
dation laid for our faith.”
Following graduation, he evangelized and pastored several churches before

[151] he reminisced many years later, “but have built a story or two on the good solid foun-
dation laid for our faith.”
Following graduation, he evangelized and pastored several churches before 
being called to pastor Conley Memorial Baptist Church in Detroit. His contact with 
Pentecostals began in 1920, but they failed to impress him. Nevertheless, a healing 
from a serious and possibly life-threatening infection led him to begin preaching on 
divine healing. But the congregation refused to accept this new teaching, and before 
long he resigned. Shortly after, he was baptized in the Spirit and joined the Assem-
blies of God. 
By now over fi  fty years old and a seasoned minister, he detected that many young 
people in the Assemblies of God were entering the ministry just like he had: with little 
preparation. In 1927 he moved to Enid, Oklahoma, where he founded a church and 
opened Southwestern Bible School. Like Alice E. Luce and Henry C. Ball, Nelson

[152] preparation. In 1927 he moved to Enid, Oklahoma, where he founded a church and 
opened Southwestern Bible School. Like Alice E. Luce and Henry C. Ball, Nelson 
recognized the need for Pentecostal curricular materials. This led him to write several 
books, including The Young Minister’s Guide (1932) and Bible Doctrines (1934), his best 
known. Before his death, Southwestern Bible School merged with two other schools 
244
Commencement Exercises
A
pril 14th the second annual commencement exercises of Southwestern Bible 
School, Enid, Okla., were held in the First Methodist Episcopal Church. A class of 
nine young men and thirteen young women—gathered from all over this country—
received diplomas. The musical numbers, both vocal and instrumental, as well as the 
[student] addresses were of high order. . . . 
On Sunday, the 12th, General Superintendent
E. S. Williams [had] preach ed the baccalaureate sermon in Enid Gospel Taberna-

[153] [student] addresses were of high order. . . . 
On Sunday, the 12th, General Superintendent
E. S. Williams [had] preach ed the baccalaureate sermon in Enid Gospel Taberna-
cle, from 1 Thess. 2:8. In the evening he delivered a missionary address after which 
Pastor Nelson asked all the students who felt the call of God upon their lives to foreign 
missionary service, to come forward, and ﬁ  fty-ﬁ ve responded. The missionary spirit 
in Southwestern has been growing, and many are now ready to go to distant lands as 
soon as they can be sent forth.
—P. C. Nelson, “Commencement Exercises at Southwestern Bible School,” 
Pentecostal Evangel (May 16, 1931): 12.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[154] (Shield of Faith Bible School and Southern Bible College) to form what is now known 
as Southwestern Assemblies of God University in Waxahachie, Texas, a fi tting legacy 
for a man who knew what it was to be ill prepared for the ministry.
MYER PEARLMAN
(1898–1943)
The personalities in this chapter came from widely different backgrounds, and 
Myer Pearlman was no exception. The eldest son of a 
Jewish family, he studied at a synagogue school in Bir-
mingham, England. In school he remembered learning 
the Jewish version of the three R’s: the Jewish faith, the 
Torah (Old Testament), and the Hebrew language. “I was 
taught,” he recalled, “that while I  was to be a patriotic 
Englishman, I was also a Jew, a member of the nation, and 
that I was different from other people. I remember passing 
meat markets, and inwardly thanking God that I did not 
eat unclean meat.”
The economic situation in England forced his  father 
to move the family to the United States in hopes of gain-

[155] meat markets, and inwardly thanking God that I did not 
eat unclean meat.”
The economic situation in England forced his  father 
to move the family to the United States in hopes of gain-
ing employment and improving their living standard. After settling in New York City in 
1915, the younger Pearlman eventually enlisted in the U.S. Army and served eighteen 
months in the medical corps in France. His profi ciency in French helped him in this 
capacity. After the war, he traveled to California where “groping for light I began to 
read religious books and attend services.” 
Sometime later, walking by a mission in San Francisco, he noticed a crowd gath-
ered at the entrance and stopped to listen to the music. On another evening, he 
stood outside again. Mustering his courage, he entered and took a seat. He was par-
ticularly impressed by the music, especially the song “Honey in the Rock,” written by 
F.A. Graves. Based on Deuteronomy 32:13 (“he nourished [Israel] with honey from

[156] ticularly impressed by the music, especially the song “Honey in the Rock,” written by 
F.A. Graves. Based on Deuteronomy 32:13 (“he nourished [Israel] with honey from 
the rock”), it tells of God’s grace and provision from an unexpected source. Verse two 
asks, “Have you ‘tasted that the Lord is gracious?’ Do you walk in the way that’s new? 
Have you drunk from the living fountain? There’s Honey in the Rock [Jesus Christ] 
for you.” Attending nightly, he eventually confessed his sins and became a Christian, 
praying “in the name of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.”
In 1922, Pearlman enrolled at Central Bible Institute, where he later met 
his wife, Irene Graves, daughter of the songwriter. A brilliant student and self-
taught in many areas, he read the Scriptures in Hebrew, Greek, Spanish, French, 
and Italian. At graduation time, the principal, Frank M. Boyd, invited him to join 
the faculty. Pearlman accepted and taught there from 1924 until his death in 1943.

[157] and Italian. At graduation time, the principal, Frank M. Boyd, invited him to join 
the faculty. Pearlman accepted and taught there from 1924 until his death in 1943. 
Since teachers were not paid when classes were out in the summer, he wrote 
materials for Gospel Publishing House to earn additional money. Before long, 
he became the writer of Adult Sunday School Teacher and The Adult and Young  People’s 
TEACHING THE SAINTS
245
 Myer Pearlman
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[158] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
Teachers’ Quarterly. With his increasing responsibilities, he divided his days between 
classroom instruction in the morning and writing in the afternoons at the publishing 
house. 
Over time, he became a widely read author in Pentecostal circles, producing 
Sunday School materials as well as a number of books. In 1937, he wrote his most 
enduring work, Knowing the Doctrines of the Bible, a four-hundred-page survey of doctrine. 
Theologian Russell P . Spittler has described it as “the theological jewel of classi-
cal Pentecostalism’s middle period—written after the era of tracts, at the throes of 
self-conscious polemic, and before the ‘evangelicalization’ of Pentecostalism led to 
the training of its teachers in places like Wheaton College and the interdenomina-
tional theological seminaries.” He notes in particular Pearlman’s careful refl  ection, 
balance, nontechnical language, and irenic tone.

[159] tional theological seminaries.” He notes in particular Pearlman’s careful refl  ection, 
balance, nontechnical language, and irenic tone.
Pearlman’s workload continued to grow: more writing, teaching, camp meet-
ings. World War II being in progress, he was approached about starting a publication 
for servicemen. Having been a serviceman, feeling he could identify with them, he 
accepted. What seemed to be a modest effort became the well-circulated paper called 
Reveille; it grew into the Servicemen’s Department. But the pace was beginning to tell 
on Pearlman; he was encouraged to slow down and rest. The assistant general super-
intendent, Ralph M. Riggs, wrote him, “You could coast . . . from now on and still 
come out ahead of the rest of us.” Eventually his health broke, and he died in a vet-
eran’s hospital; he was forty-fi  ve. Among the fl  oral arrangements at his funeral, two 
symbolized his spiritual pilgrimage: a large Star of David made of blue fl  owers sent by

[160] eran’s hospital; he was forty-fi  ve. Among the fl  oral arrangements at his funeral, two 
symbolized his spiritual pilgrimage: a large Star of David made of blue fl  owers sent by 
Jewish friends and a cross made of white fl  owers from his Gentile friends.
MARCUS L. GRABLE 
(1891–1970)
At an interdenominational revival held at the Shrine Mosque in Springfi eld, Mis-
souri, in 1933, Marcus Grable fi  rst encountered Ralph Riggs, then pastor of Central 
Assembly of God. Area pastors had been invited to give the invocation at the meetings, 
and one evening Riggs offered the prayer. Afterward, Grable turned to his wife and said, 
“That man knows God.” Before long, the Grables joined the Assemblies of God. Riggs 
246
Doctrinal Knowledge Is Essential
S
trong beliefs make for strong character; clear-cut beliefs make for clear-cut con-
victions. Of course, a person’s doctrinal belief is not his religion any more than

[161] S
trong beliefs make for strong character; clear-cut beliefs make for clear-cut con-
victions. Of course, a person’s doctrinal belief is not his religion any more than 
the backbone is the man’s personality. But as good backbone is an essential part of 
the man’s body, so a deﬁ nite system of belief is an essential part of a man’s religion. 
It has been well said that “a man does not need to wear his backbone in front of him, 
but he must have a backbone and a straight one or he will be a [shapeless], if not a 
humpbacked, Christian.
—Myer Pearlman, Knowing the Doctrines of the Bible (1937), 9–10.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[162] and Grable, a minister and a layman, soon found they shared a common concern: pro-
moting Sunday Schools and teacher training. Little did Riggs know when he prayed that 
night that he would inspire another Sunday School enthusiast like himself.
Grable had been converted at the Christian Church in Egerton, Missouri, in 1901, 
and through the years worked in different leadership roles in local Sunday Schools. 
After moving to Springfi  eld and joining Central Assembly, he started working as a 
janitor at Gospel Publishing House. In his spare time, he assisted in the opening 
of three branch Sunday Schools in the community. At work, he asked for a desk and 
typewriter to answer inquiries about Sunday School matters that arrived from around 
the country.
Recognizing the need for better training and standardizing Sunday School pro-
grams, and noting the obvious skills and enthusiasm of Grable, the Executive Presby-

[163] the country.
Recognizing the need for better training and standardizing Sunday School pro-
grams, and noting the obvious skills and enthusiasm of Grable, the Executive Presby-
tery appointed him in 1935 to lead and develop the newly established Sunday School 
Promotion Department. His offi  ce began with a steel table, a chair, and a typewriter. 
From modest beginnings, this devoted layman aggressively built a national program 
that saw phenomenal growth before his resignation from offi  ce fourteen years later. 
He became the General Council’s “Mr. Sunday School.” During his years in offi  ce, 
Assemblies of God Sunday Schools expanded by 300 percent, leading all other church 
groups in growth.
Two chief objectives guided his plans: teacher training and Sunday School con-
ventions. For example, shortly after taking offi  ce, he sent every pastor a compli-
mentary copy of Riggs’s Successful Sunday School. In conjunction with this, he intro-

[164] ventions. For example, shortly after taking offi  ce, he sent every pastor a compli-
mentary copy of Riggs’s Successful Sunday School. In conjunction with this, he intro-
duced a “Training for Christian Service” course that laid the groundwork for the 
national Workers Training program. Standards for local Sunday Schools were also set. 
To offer further assistance, he launched Our Sunday School Counselor in 1939, the offi cial 
publication for Assemblies of God Sunday Schools, and later the [Sunday School] 
Superintendent’s Assistant. 
Grable’s second objective focused on 
sponsoring national and regional Sunday 
School conventions. The fi  rst of eleven 
national conventions gathered in Spring-
fi eld, Missouri, in 1940. Near the end of 
his tenure, the Sunday School Department 
introduced the Boys and Girls Missionary 
Crusade (BGMC) at the National Sunday 
School Convention in Springfi  eld in 1949 
to promote missions among the children 
and raise funds for various projects.

[165] Crusade (BGMC) at the National Sunday 
School Convention in Springfi  eld in 1949 
to promote missions among the children 
and raise funds for various projects.
With failing health he resigned 
in 1949, but remained in Springfi  eld. 
 Ironically, he felt that a minister would 
serve the offi  ce better. In retirement, his 
TEACHING THE SAINTS
247
 Early in 1942 the national Sunday School  Department 
mailed this Lighthouse Sunday School poster to 
5,000 AG Sunday Schools. Promoting the Lighthouse 
idea are (l to r): J. Z. Kamerer, general manager of 
Gospel Publishing House; Loine Honderick, Sunday 
School representative; and Marcus L. Grable, “Mr. 
Sunday School.”
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[166] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
interest in Sunday Schools never fl  agged. Four days before his death in 1970, he 
participated in a parade that was part of a kid’s crusade at Calvary Temple Assembly 
of God. Dressed as a farmer, he pushed a wheelbarrow on the three-mile parade 
route with a display he had made himself. The sign on it summed up his life’s work: 
“Pushin’ for Our Kids.”
CHRISTINE A. GIBSON
(1879–1955)
At the dinner hour at Zion Bible Institute in East Providence, Rhode Island, barely 
enough food to eat could be found in the pantry. Zion’s stance as a “faith school” 
would again be tested. “Mother” Gibson rose to the occasion and led the students 
in singing the Doxology. As they sang “Praise God from whom all blessings fl  ow,” a 
truckload of canned goods, fruits, vegetables, and staples arrived, along with a cash 
offering. It had come as a gift from friends in western New York. Dinner was soon on 
the table. The story of Christine Gibson abounds with

[167] offering. It had come as a gift from friends in western New York. Dinner was soon on 
the table. The story of Christine Gibson abounds with 
such stories of faith, divine guidance through visions 
and dreams, and the pursuit of the ministry to which 
God had called her.
Her parents having died when she was quite young, 
Christine Eckman was reared by her grandmother in 
Georgetown, British Guiana (present-day Guyana in 
South America). She attended a Pres byterian school. 
As a young adult, her life and enjoyments were similar 
to those of other young women her age. One evening 
while on her way to a dance, a girlfriend asked her if she 
would mind going with her to visit briefl  y a Salvation 
Army offi  cer who had become ill. When he learned of 
their plans to go dancing, he looked at Christine and 
said, “A little dance, a little hell; a little dance, a little 
hell.” She took offense, but his words haunted her.
248
Why a National Sunday School Convention?
T

[168] said, “A little dance, a little hell; a little dance, a little 
hell.” She took offense, but his words haunted her.
248
Why a National Sunday School Convention?
T
he evangelistic use of the Sunday School (and oh, what an evangelizing agency a 
Sunday School is!) is discovered to be not just an available means for the growth 
and extension of our own Sunday School and church, but it becomes a path of duty and 
obedience. The sheep and lambs out there all around us are His sheep and lambs, and 
He says He (and we) must bring them in. Our determination to succeed in our Sunday 
School work deepens into a solemn resolve to obey our Master at any . . . cost. He will 
be with us in this as in every other phase of obedience to the Great Commission.
—Ralph M. Riggs, “Why a National Sunday School Convention,” 
Pentecostal Evangel (February 24, 1952): 5.
 Christine A. Gibson

[169] —Ralph M. Riggs, “Why a National Sunday School Convention,” 
Pentecostal Evangel (February 24, 1952): 5.
 Christine A. Gibson
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[170] On her way home from work a few days later, she felt compelled to enter a nearby 
Roman Catholic Church. Kneeling before the altar, she experienced a vision of Christ’s 
crucifi xion and heard the words: “Do you see that Man on the cross? He took the sin-
ner’s place. He became sin for a lost world. You are a sinner. He died in your stead. 
You can have His righteousness, for He is your salvation.” This brought about her 
conversion; soon after, she affi rmed her faith at the Salvation Army “barracks” (chapel). 
Feeling called to mission work two years later, she went into the interior of her 
own country to take over the mission station of a missionary who had become too ill 
to continue. Unfortunately, Christine quickly felt the ravages of malaria, but trusting 
in Christ as her Healer, she refused to take quinine. With her health broken, she had 
no alternative but to return to Georgetown. Then, leaving a failed marriage behind,

[171] in Christ as her Healer, she refused to take quinine. With her health broken, she had 
no alternative but to return to Georgetown. Then, leaving a failed marriage behind, 
she immigrated to the United States and began preaching in holiness circles before 
settling in East Providence, Rhode Island. There she joined Alpheus Angel Cleve-
land’s Church of the First Born (later Zion Gospel Temple). 
Christine heard about the Pentecostal revival from several friends. One of them, 
Reuben A. Gibson, a Christian and Missionary Alliance pastor, had attended the 
revival that took place at the Missionary Training Institute in Nyack, New York, in May 
1907. Several weeks later, she visited the Rochester Bible Training School directed by 
Elizabeth V. Baker and her four sisters. During a morning devotional hour, she was 
baptized in the Spirit.
In 1920 Christine and Reuben were married and worked together in ministry.

[172] Elizabeth V. Baker and her four sisters. During a morning devotional hour, she was 
baptized in the Spirit.
In 1920 Christine and Reuben were married and worked together in ministry. 
Eventually, she became pastor of the church in East Providence and director of its 
faith home. Four years later (and just months after the death of her husband), she 
opened the doors of Mount Zion Bible School. She renamed it the School of the 
Prophets a year later; in 1936 the name changed again to Zion Bible Institute. (In 
1999, Zion Bible Institute, now located in Barrington, Rhode Island, became an 
endorsed college of the Assemblies of God dedicated solely to ministerial training.)
TEACHING THE SAINTS
249
NCBI Announcement 
N
orth Central Bible Institute and Business College, Minneapolis, Minn., will begin 
its 10th year [on] Sept. 18. It offers thorough training in Bible subjects in a three 
year, two year, or one year course. A. G. Ward, formerly of Toronto, Canada, has now

[173] its 10th year [on] Sept. 18. It offers thorough training in Bible subjects in a three 
year, two year, or one year course. A. G. Ward, formerly of Toronto, Canada, has now 
joined our Faculty. Thorough training in Secretarial, Accounting, Bookkeeping, Short-
hand, Typesetting, Business English, and Commercial Law, with actual oﬃ  ce practice 
is offered. Dormitory and class rooms in modern ﬁ  re-proof building in the heart of the 
city. Splendid opportunities for part time employment for students, and also for practi-
cal Christian work in the Twin Cities. Only Christian students accepted.
For catalogs and literature write to 900 Elliot Ave. S., Minneapolis, Minn.
—Frank J. Lindquist,
“North Central Bible Institute and Business College,” 
Pentecostal Evangel (September 16, 1939): 15
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[174] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
Founded on faith in God’s provision, the institute’s operation was described by 
Mary Campbell Wilson, Gibson’s biographer: “No charges of any kind were placed 
upon the students. They came, and everyone trusted God to supply the needs of Zion. 
Were it not for the stand that she took, many would have been denied the privilege of 
Bible school training. Sister Gibson championed the rights of the poor, and the rights 
of all men to study the Word of God.”
After the closing of Rochester Bible Training School and Bethel Bible Training 
School in the 1920s, and the gradual decline of Beulah Heights Bible and Missionary 
Training Institute, other schools appeared on the scene. These included Metropolitan 
Bible Institute in Suffern, New York, and New England Bible Institute in Framingham, 
Massachusetts. 
In response to the need for training, even more schools came into being, this 
time in Pennsylvania. After becoming superintendent of the Eastern district in 1929,

[175] Massachusetts. 
In response to the need for training, even more schools came into being, this 
time in Pennsylvania. After becoming superintendent of the Eastern district in 1929, 
J. Roswell Flower and his wife, Alice Reynolds Flower, started a summer Bible school 
three years later at the Maranatha Park campground in Green Lane. In 1938, a perma-
nent institution began at the same site, Eastern Bible Institute (present-day Valley 
Forge Christian College in Phoenixville, Pennsylvania), with former missionary Allan 
Swift as its fi  rst president. Each of these schools prepared men and women who 
became Assemblies of God ministers, missionaries, and trained laypersons.
250
President Milton T. Wells teaching a class at Eastern Bible Institute in Green Lane, Pennsylvania
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[176] STANLEY H. FRODSHAM
(1882–1969)
“We are praying for God’s man; are you that man?” asked John W. Welch, the 
general chairman of the Assemblies of God in 1916. While thanking Stanley H. Frod-
sham for three articles that he had submitted to the Pentecostal 
Evangel, Welch took the opportunity to ask him about being its 
editor. Frodsham’s acceptance of the invitation propelled this 
Britisher into a national leadership role in the Assemblies of 
God that would continue for the next three decades.
Few people were better qualifi ed than Frodsham. In his 
native England he had edited Victory, a monthly periodical 
that reported Pentecostal revivals around the world. Besides 
his skillful writing and absolute dedication to the task of pub-
licizing the Pentecostal message, he also had friendships and 
contacts with other fi  rst-generation Pentecostal leaders. 
Frodsham had been baptized in the Spirit since 1908

[177] licizing the Pentecostal message, he also had friendships and 
contacts with other fi  rst-generation Pentecostal leaders. 
Frodsham had been baptized in the Spirit since 1908 
when he visited the (Anglican) All Saints Church pastored by Alexander A. Boddy in 
Sunderland, England. All Saints had been the scene of Pentecostal revival for over 
a year. But it had been Mrs. Boddy, rather than the pastor, who had laid hands on 
Frodsham. He was kneeling at the exact spot where Smith Wigglesworth had been 
baptized a year earlier, and as she prayed, Frodsham reported, “it seemed as if a thou-
sand strong electric batteries came into my legs, and then a lot more came into my 
vocal organs—and volumes, torrents of tongues, poured from my lips. Thus began a 
full six months of heaven upon earth.”
With his wife, Alice, they moved to the United States. At Welch’s request, they 
attended the 1916 General Council in St. Louis. There Welch chatted with Mary

[178] full six months of heaven upon earth.”
With his wife, Alice, they moved to the United States. At Welch’s request, they 
attended the 1916 General Council in St. Louis. There Welch chatted with Mary 
Arthur from Galena, Kansas, a woman he greatly respected. “Have you been praying 
as I requested you to do for God’s man to be the editor of the Evangel?” he asked. “Yes, 
and every time I pray,” she replied, “the Lord shows me that the man who wrote this 
article is the one He has chosen.” She pointed to an article by Frodsham in a recent 
issue of the Pentecostal Evangel. The Frodsham family then moved to Springfi eld, Mis-
souri. For fi  ve years before assuming the position of senior editor, he worked as the 
Council’s general secretary and missionary secretary in addition to his responsibility 
as assistant editor. 
Like other early Council leaders at the headquarters, the Frodshams had little 
choice but to live frugally; his beginning salary was fi ve dollars per week. Never pur-

[179] as assistant editor. 
Like other early Council leaders at the headquarters, the Frodshams had little 
choice but to live frugally; his beginning salary was fi ve dollars per week. Never pur-
chasing a car, they preferred to walk or take public transportation in order to have 
more money to send to missionaries. 
In 1921 the General Council selected him to be the senior editor and, by virtue of 
that offi  ce, a member of the Executive Presbytery. He was thirty-nine years old. Over 
time, he became a prolifi  c writer. In addition to editorials and articles, he wrote Sunday 
TEACHING THE SAINTS
251
 Stanley H. Frodsham
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[180] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
School quarterlies and papers. Fifteen books came from his pen, including a children’s 
book, The Boomerang and Other Stories (1925), which was serialized in four periodicals 
with a combined circulation of one hundred thousand. He also wrote With Signs Follow-
ing: The Story of the Latter Day Pentecostal Revival (1926), the fi  rst world survey of the Pente-
costal movement. Two others about his friend Smith Wiggles worth became immensely 
popular: Ever Increasing Faith (1924), stories from his ministry, and Apostle of Faith (1948), 
a biography. Along with Alice Reynolds Flower and Carrie Judd Montgomery, he stands 
as one of the most prominent spiritual teachers in the Pentecostal movement. 
As editor, Frodsham exercised charity in responding to the critics of Pentecos-
talism. In 1928, a convention of fundamentalists broadly denounced the  Movement, 
accusing it of fanaticism and unscriptural teachings—“a menace in many churches

[181] talism. In 1928, a convention of fundamentalists broadly denounced the  Movement, 
accusing it of fanaticism and unscriptural teachings—“a menace in many churches 
and a real injury to sane testimony of Fundamental Christians.” Publishing the 
statement in the Pentecostal Evangel, he replied: “Although we Pentecostal people have 
to be without the camp, we cannot afford to be bitter against those who do not see 
as we do.” Rather, “our business is to love these Fundamentalists and to pray, ‘Lord, 
bless them all.’”
252
Boys Plucked from a Life of Crime
A
fter graduating from Eastern Bible [Institute] [now Valley 
Forge Christian College], I began working in Gwinhurst, Del-
aware. My co-worker and I had no funds to rent an apartment for 
us nor to rent a building to use as a church. 
Praise God He answered our prayers with an old bus on a 
large lot! We slept and ate in this cold bus and almost froze in 
the winter. Neighbors brought us tomatoes and we ate tomato

[182] Praise God He answered our prayers with an old bus on a 
large lot! We slept and ate in this cold bus and almost froze in 
the winter. Neighbors brought us tomatoes and we ate tomato 
sandwiches for some weeks. God was with us. One night after 
midnight a loud knock woke us and there was one of the breth-
ren of the Lord with boxes and bags of food.
After canvassing the community, we had many parents con-
sent to send their children to our Sunday school and vacation Bible school. On com-
mencement evening, every seat in the YMCA was ﬁ  lled with children and their parents, 
including the parents of some incorrigible boys who were already at ages 5, 6, and 7 
stealing, smoking and cursing. The parents asked us, “How did you do it?” It was worth 
all the efforts we put forth.
Though we were very tired from working with these children, and from walking 
long distances, neither the weariness nor the cold bothered us because Jesus blessed.

[183] all the efforts we put forth.
Though we were very tired from working with these children, and from walking 
long distances, neither the weariness nor the cold bothered us because Jesus blessed. 
Children were being saved, and mothers were being touched by God’s Spirit. I can say 
without hesitancy those days were our happiest, despite the hardships.
A few years ago, I saw in the Pentecostal Evangel one of our “boys” now minister-
ing as a missionary in a foreign country. Only eternity will tell how many of the children 
to whom we ministered were plucked from a life of crime and drugs. Praise be to God!
—Philomena M. Trocine, Reﬂ  ections of Faith (1992), 74–75.
Philomena M. Trocine
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[184] At sixty-seven Frodsham was still spiritually alert to and eager for the moving of 
God’s Spirit. His daughter described him as “a man of intense passion for the super-
natural” and “always eager to attend services where people were praying and being 
brought into vital contact with the Lord.” Such a disposition led him to identify with 
a move that would become known as the New Order of the Latter Rain. At the same 
time, he was aware of his visibility and identifi  cation with the Assemblies of God, 
which the new move was challenging. In good conscience he could not be identifi ed 
with both. So on November 5, 1949, after almost thirty years as the editor of the Pente-
costal Evangel, Stanley Frodsham offered his letter of resignation, which was reluctantly 
accepted by the executive brethren. Not only did the new movement affect him, it 
would soon impact the spiritual identity of the Assemblies of God itself (as a later 
chapter will recount). 
RECOMMENDED READING

[185] would soon impact the spiritual identity of the Assemblies of God itself (as a later 
chapter will recount). 
RECOMMENDED READING
Burke, Bob and Viola Holder. The Whole Gospel for the Whole World: The Life of P. C. Nelson. Okla-
homa City, OK: Commonwealth Press, 2008.
Campbell, Faith. Stanley Frodsham: Prophet with a Pen. Springfi  eld, Mo.: Gospel Publishing 
House, 1974.
Evans, William I. “The Standards of the C. B. I.” Pentecostal Evangel (9 April 1930): 8.
Kendrick, Klaude. “A Pioneer Pentecostal Educator.” Assemblies of God Heritage 2 (spring 1982): 
2, 4.
Lee, Sylvia. “Sunday School Conventions—A Quest for Quality.” Assemblies of God Heritage 12 
(summer 1992): 15–19.
———. “Marcus L. Grable: ‘Mr. Sunday School’ for the Assemblies of God.” Assemblies of God 
Heritage 21 (winter 2001–2002): 4–7, 10–11.
Nelson, P . C. Autobiography of P. C. Nelson. Unpublished ms., 1928.
Pearlman, Irene P . Myer Pearlman and His Friends. Springfi  eld, Mo.: By the author, 1953.

[186] Nelson, P . C. Autobiography of P. C. Nelson. Unpublished ms., 1928.
Pearlman, Irene P . Myer Pearlman and His Friends. Springfi  eld, Mo.: By the author, 1953.
Spittler, Russell P . “Theological Style Among Pentecostals and Charismatics.” In Doing Theology 
in Today’s World, edited by John D. Woodbridge and Thomas Edward McComiskey, 291–318. 
Grand Rapids: Zondervan Publishing House, 1991.
Wilson, Mary Campbell. The Obedience of Faith: The Story of Rev. Christine A. Gibson, Founder of Zion 
Bible Institute. Tulsa: Victory House, 1993.
TEACHING THE SAINTS
253
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[187] EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[188] 255
I
n Christian history, certain teachers have stood out for their spiritual wisdom. 
Although some have been teachers in the formal sense of classroom instruction, 
all have been identifi  ed as people of prayer and valued for their insights into 
the divine dimension of Christian living. They have received respect not because of 
human selection or their own theoretical knowledge, but on the basis of what they 
have personally “seen and tasted.” In a true sense, they function as theologians, not 
in the modern academic sense, but as a result of time spent in the school of prayer.
John Wright Follette, an Assemblies of God minister and one of the best-known 
spiritual teachers in early Pentecostalism, aptly expressed such passion in his poem 
“Breath of God:”
O Breath of God, I need Thee so!
Apart from Thee I cannot live.
I seek no other life to know
But that which Thou alone canst give.
In me no goodly thing I fi nd,
I sink in utter helplessness.
By Thee I live, O Breath divine—

[189] Apart from Thee I cannot live.
I seek no other life to know
But that which Thou alone canst give.
In me no goodly thing I fi nd,
I sink in utter helplessness.
By Thee I live, O Breath divine—
So full of life and blessedness.
And if the embers of my love
Should smolder in the ashes gray,
And only in my memory
Should burn the love of yesterday,
Come, Holy Breath, and breathe once more
Upon this fainting heart of mine
Until it bursts into a fl ame
To burn for Thee with love divine.
In Methodism and the broader holiness movement, leaders such as John Wesley, 
Phoebe Palmer, William E. Boardman, Hannah Whitall Smith, A. B. Simpson, Andrew 
Murray, as well as the Christian Brethren philanthropist George Müller, inspired the 
CHAPTER 15 
SPIRITUAL 
MENTORS
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[190] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
faithful to seek to become more Christlike. Pentecostalism, built in large part on their 
foundational work, has also produced remarkable spiritual mentors. They have mod-
eled the faith life in one way or another, offered guidance on the ministry of the gifts 
of the Spirit, and taught believers how to pray and sense the moving of the Holy Spirit 
in worship. Joseph and Helen Wannenmacher pastored for decades in Milwaukee, 
but their ministry extended far beyond the city limits. Zelma Argue and Charles S. 
Price each traveled as evangelists across North America. Robert Cummings served for 
many years as a missionary to India and as a teacher at Central Bible Institute (CBI). 
Known for her teachings on the “deeper life,” evangelist Hattie Hammond became 
one of the most prominent speakers in the Pentecostal movement. 
Since mentoring in Pentecostal spirituality can hardly be separated from worship

[191] one of the most prominent speakers in the Pentecostal movement. 
Since mentoring in Pentecostal spirituality can hardly be separated from worship 
in music, Herbert Buffum, the itinerant composer of ten thousand gospel songs, has 
been included. Finally, the chapter ends with W. I. Evans, the revered dean of Bethel 
Bible Training School and CBI.
JOSEPH (1895–1989) AND 
HELEN WANNENMACHER (1890–1985)
At the conclusion of a Sunday morning sermon at First Assembly of God in Elyria, 
Ohio, in the fall of 1954, Pastor Robert Graber began preparing to serve Commu-
nion to the congregation. Because Pentecostals 
believe the atonement of Christ provides both 
spiritual and physical healing, they have often 
prayed for the sick when celebrating the Lord’s 
Supper. Graber then recounted a story of healing 
that his father-in-law, Joseph P . Wannenmacher, 
had shared with him.
Wannenmacher had been born into a Ger-
man Catholic family in Hungary in 1895. As a

[192] that his father-in-law, Joseph P . Wannenmacher, 
had shared with him.
Wannenmacher had been born into a Ger-
man Catholic family in Hungary in 1895. As a 
teenager, the family left for the United States 
and settled in Milwaukee, Wisconsin. For a time, 
he worked as an apprentice mechanic and later 
as a foreman in a tool shop. A diseased foot, 
two operations, and the remaining possibility of 
amputation forced him to change professions. A 
skilled violinist, he began to play in restaurants, 
theaters, and concert halls to make a living.
A friend suggested that he seek healing through the assistance of a Christian 
Science practitioner. But instead of improvement, his condition became worse. 
Fortunately, he began to read a Bible that someone had given the family. In 1917, 
the Wannenmacher family learned about a church that preached “Jesus Christ was 
the living Saviour and the healer of men today—in this present day and age.” Vis-

[193] the Wannenmacher family learned about a church that preached “Jesus Christ was 
the living Saviour and the healer of men today—in this present day and age.” Vis-
iting the German Pentecostal mission, he responded immediately when the pastor, 
256
 Joseph and Helen Wannenmacher
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[194] SPIRITUAL MENTORS
257
Pastoring Elder Bates
I
t was my joy to pastor Elder Bates in the last 
years of his life. While he was able to drive, 
I could always count on him driving his Chrysler 
Imperial (“the only car worth driving”) down to 
the church to pray over his pastor (“pastah”). 
He would lay his big hands on my head and 
call on God for the Holy Ghost anointing on 
his pastah. He was a very tall and lean man. 
He liked to refer to his height as 5 feet and 18 
inches tall.
His deep concern for the welfare of the 
ministers of our fellowship prompted him to 
start Christian Fidelity Insurance Company. 
He served as the president for many years and the company prospered and 
blessed many of our Assemblies of God ministers and churches through insur-
ance and church loans.
When physical weakness overcame him and he was hospitalized, he 
called for me to come and discuss his funeral with him. He had asked me to

[195] ance and church loans.
When physical weakness overcame him and he was hospitalized, he 
called for me to come and discuss his funeral with him. He had asked me to 
bring Pete Pulley, one of our ministers and musicians. He gave Brother Pete 
a chorus he wanted sung. Pete asked what he wanted after that. Elder Bates 
said, “Pete, if you don’t know what to do after you sing that song, just sit 
down.” Then he instructed me with great earnestness: “Don’t let them put 
on a dead funeral for me; I want a celebration! If you don’t have a glorious 
celebration, I will come back and do it myself.” The Southwestern Assemblies 
of God College (now University) Chapel was full and I assured them he meant 
business about his funeral. He no doubt was proud, for we had a celebration, 
not a dead funeral.
Over 60 years ago, A.C. Bates started the Southwestern Prayer and Bible 
Conference, which continues today without a break. Elder Bates was con-

[196] not a dead funeral.
Over 60 years ago, A.C. Bates started the Southwestern Prayer and Bible 
Conference, which continues today without a break. Elder Bates was con-
cerned to maintain Pentecostal fervor, worship, and Pentecostal doctrines and 
practices. This meeting was designed to promote the apostolic and prophetic 
gifts and ministry that gave birth to the Pentecostal Movement. It continues 
today to draw a large attendance from across the nine districts that make up 
the region.
On one occasion, he was preaching in a West Texas town on the court-
house steps when a heckler kept disturbing the meeting. He stopped preach-
ing and asked the crowd to wait a moment for him. Dragging the fella around 
to the other side of the courthouse, he “whipped the tar” out of him. He then 
returned and ﬁ  nished his preaching. I asked him about this story once and he 
just smiled with a measure of delight on his face.
—James K. Bridges

[197] returned and ﬁ  nished his preaching. I asked him about this story once and he 
just smiled with a measure of delight on his face.
—James K. Bridges
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[198] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
Hugo Ulrich, asked: “If there is anyone here who is sick and wishes to be prayed for, 
come to the front.”
“No sooner had I bowed my knees before the Almighty God and His Son Jesus 
Christ—even before the preacher or anyone else could pray with me,” Wannen-
macher remembered, “than the power of God fell upon me in mighty dynamic healing 
streams surging through my entire body.” Two weeks after his conversion and healing, 
he received Holy Spirit baptism.
In 1921, while preparing for ministry at the Zion Faith Homes in Zion City, Illinois, 
he met and married Helen Innes. Her family had moved there twenty years earlier to 
sit under the ministry of John Alexander Dowie. Converted while attending a service 
at one of the Faith Homes, she received Spirit baptism soon afterward. While on her 
way to another service, God assured her that he had a greater blessing for her. “After it 
was over I was aware that I still had not received all that He had for me,” she remem-

[199] way to another service, God assured her that he had a greater blessing for her. “After it 
was over I was aware that I still had not received all that He had for me,” she remem-
bered. “So while others visited in the vestibule, I quietly knelt down in an inner room 
by myself. No sooner had my knees touched the fl  oor than the Spirit began fl ooding 
my soul with the glory of the Lord. . . . The power of God was so mightily upon me 
that before I realized it, I was lying prostrate on the fl  oor, with my hands outstretched 
to heaven and at times shaking mightily under its power.” Before long, “such a joy of 
surrender fi  lled my soul that I began to laugh and weep at the same time. . . . At that 
moment I began to speak in other tongues as the Spirit gave utterance. For some 
time I lay praising God in tongues and weeping with tongues of intercession.” Innes 
then ministered in the Faith Homes before helping to pioneer Pentecostal churches

[200] time I lay praising God in tongues and weeping with tongues of intercession.” Innes 
then ministered in the Faith Homes before helping to pioneer Pentecostal churches 
in nearby Waukegan, Illinois, and Kenosha, Wisconsin.
258
How Can We Have a Revival?
W
hen you think that a revival means going out and bringing sinners to the altar, 
you are wrong. You will never be able to drag sinners to the altar over a bunch 
of icebergs. Pentecostal people are the best people in the world but all some of them 
ever do is to warm eighteen inches of a bench, say “Glory” once in a while, and when 
church is over make a dash for home. God’s people need to pray. The doors of the 
house of prayer need to be repaired. The ﬁ  re of God needs to be re-kindled. All that 
deﬁ les must be put away. The saints must fully consecrate themselves. We need to let 
the Holy Ghost work in us as individuals and as a congregation until the beauty of God’s

[201] deﬁ les must be put away. The saints must fully consecrate themselves. We need to let 
the Holy Ghost work in us as individuals and as a congregation until the beauty of God’s 
holiness is manifest. Then the outsider will say, “That is what I have wanted all my life; 
let me get to the altar.”
An old-fashioned Holy Ghost revival starts right behind the pulpit, works out into 
the pews, gets hold of the deacons, Sunday School teachers, and all the church mem-
bers. All the big I’s are erased, and all the little u’s are lifted up. Everyone falls on his 
face, prays through, gets in a good humor with everyone else and gets a new inﬁ  lling 
of the Holy Ghost.
—Aaron A. Wilson, “How Can We Have a Revival?” 
Pentecostal Evangel (September 30, 1939): 1.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[202] Joseph and Helen spent more than sixty years in Milwaukee pastoring Calvary 
Assembly and planting new churches in the city. (They began their ministry by going 
door-to-door offering to pray for anyone in the home who might be sick.) Genu-
inely partners in ministry, their endeavors infl  uenced a broad audience in America 
and Europe. In addition to her role as copastor, Helen became popular as a retreat 
speaker and wrote many articles for Bread of Life magazine. Joseph served as the 
fi rst superintendent of the Hungarian district of the Assemblies of God and also 
assisted Assemblies of God relief efforts in Central and Eastern Europe. Despite all 
of these activities, prayer and keen insights into the ministry and gifts of the Holy 
Spirit marked their ministries.
Graber proceeded to tell the Elyria congregation that on one occasion when 
Wannenmacher was on his way by train to New York City, he felt led of the Lord to

[203] Spirit marked their ministries.
Graber proceeded to tell the Elyria congregation that on one occasion when 
Wannenmacher was on his way by train to New York City, he felt led of the Lord to 
make an unplanned stop in Lorain, Ohio, to visit the home of a Hungarian pastor. A 
conductor assured him that he could still arrive on time by getting on board another 
train that would come two hours later. 
Arriving by taxi at the parsonage, he found the home fi lled with relatives who told 
him that the daughter was gravely ill and near death. “The atmosphere in that house 
was so fi  lled with unbelief and fear, you could have cut it with a knife,” Wannenmacher 
told his son-in-law. He then announced to the family, “I am on my way from Milwaukee 
to New York City. While traveling past Toledo, God told me I should stop in Lorain, 
pray the prayer of faith, and the Lord would heal your daughter.” Leaving the unbeliev-

[204] to New York City. While traveling past Toledo, God told me I should stop in Lorain, 
pray the prayer of faith, and the Lord would heal your daughter.” Leaving the unbeliev-
ing relatives downstairs, he went up to her bedroom where he found twenty-two-year-
old Elizabeth Urban on her deathbed. Surprised to see “Pastor Wannenmacher,” she 
too expressed her belief that she was dying.
While tuning up his violin (he always carried it with him), he told her, “Nonsense, 
honey. If the Lord never wanted to heal you, He would not have told me about your 
illness, and would not have asked me to come and pray the prayer of faith.” As he 
played “What a Friend We Have in Jesus,” the “room was fi  lled with God’s presence, 
and the power of God touched Elizabeth so that she jumped out of bed with the sheet 
wrapped around her.” Before he could anoint her with oil and pray for her, “she was 
instantly healed and strengthened. As she came down the steps, the family thought

[205] wrapped around her.” Before he could anoint her with oil and pray for her, “she was 
instantly healed and strengthened. As she came down the steps, the family thought 
she was out of her mind, but she wanted food.” After lunch together, they drove him 
back to the train station.
When Graber fi  nished telling the story, he stepped out of the pulpit and down 
to the Communion table. As he did, a woman raised her hand. Since he didn’t know 
her, he was reluctant to let her speak and delay the Communion service any longer. 
But when a parishioner next to her nodded in approval, he addressed her by saying, 
“Would you like to say something?” 
She replied, “Yes, Pastor Graber. I am Elizabeth Urban. I am the young woman 
you spoke about. God healed me instantly. I was completely restored to full strength 
and I have not been sick from that day to this. Shortly after my healing I married, 
helped my husband pastor, [and] moved to California.” Not having been back to Ohio 
SPIRITUAL MENTORS

[206] and I have not been sick from that day to this. Shortly after my healing I married, 
helped my husband pastor, [and] moved to California.” Not having been back to Ohio 
SPIRITUAL MENTORS
259
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[207] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
since the healing, she had returned to visit friends from her father’s Hungarian con-
gregation and just happened to visit First Assembly in Elyria with the friend who was 
sitting next to her on that Sunday morning. 
Graber, who had no idea that the woman was still alive or that she was sitting 
in the service, said, “You can imagine the kind of communion we had after that!”
As John Wright Follette said, “In the new creation we are blest with wonderful 
capacity for the deep things of the Spirit and fuller revelations of God. That is why, 
after real prayer for a closer walk and fuller knowledge of Him, He begins uncovering, 
as it were, and digging down into the inner life, to make room and enlarge our powers 
of apprehension and appreciation. There are potential powers for God waiting to be 
released and set free.”
ZELMA ARGUE
(1900–1980)
“When a meeting seemed locked tight, fasting and secret prayer would bring a 
break,” so wrote Zelma Argue.

[208] released and set free.”
ZELMA ARGUE
(1900–1980)
“When a meeting seemed locked tight, fasting and secret prayer would bring a 
break,” so wrote Zelma Argue.
“Souls are not melted to weeping and groaning in anguish 
for their sins” unless believers intercede with God in prayer for 
their conversion. She knew the truth of this from evangelistic 
campaigns across the United States and Canada. At Topeka, 
Kansas, when the expected results were slow in coming, she and 
another female evangelist called the congregation to set aside a 
day of fasting and prayer. She recalled that “hours were spent in 
waiting there upon God, and a spirit of victory seemed to come 
to the praying ones.”
At the close of the next service, while the faithful sang invi-
tation choruses for sinners (“Jesus Is Passing This Way” and 
“What Will Your Answer Be?”), something unusual happened. A woman with both 
arms raised and crying at the top of her voice made her way forward. Her hus-

[209] “What Will Your Answer Be?”), something unusual happened. A woman with both 
arms raised and crying at the top of her voice made her way forward. Her hus-
band soon followed and also confessed his need of salvation. They were new to 
the church and had attended only to pacify their seventeen-year-old son, who had 
repeatedly asked them to accompany him. Argue declared that their conversions 
had “brought a break in that campaign. . . . Our day of prayer was more than repaid, 
and the campaign went forward in real victory.”
Pentecostal evangelists claimed that successful soul winning required prepara-
tion in prayer as well as the ministry of the Holy Spirit. It was far more than an exer-
cise in rational persuasion: The power of the Spirit was expected to break the chains 
of sin that enslaved people and set them free. Such scenes of conviction and deliver-
ance were not uncommon. (The husband found the next day that the mere thought of

[210] of sin that enslaved people and set them free. Such scenes of conviction and deliver-
ance were not uncommon. (The husband found the next day that the mere thought of 
his old smoking habit made him sick to his stomach.)
Argue’s ministry was intertwined with those of other family members. Her 
 father, Andrew H. Argue, a businessman in Winnipeg, Canada, received the 
260
 Zelma Argue 
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[211] baptism in the Holy Spirit at William H. Durham’s North Avenue Mission in Chi-
cago in 1907. This experience led him and his children to become one of the 
best-known Pentecostal families dedicated to evangelism. In 1920, Argue invited 
twenty-year-old Zelma to join his evangelistic party. For sixty years, she traveled 
at different times with her father, her brother, Watson, and her sister, Beulah. 
Sometimes she traveled alone, but always with her trombone (a favorite instru-
ment among Pentecostal preachers).
Her piety, like that of other Pentecostals, centered on “communing with Jesus, 
holding a feast with Him . . . , worshiping Him, loving Him, adoring Him, [being] con-
scious of His presence more strongly than of our surroundings.” Life in the Spirit of 
Christ meant the continual “infl  owing and outfl  owing” of the water of life (John 7:38). 
As long as the believer had her or his eyes on Jesus, taught Argue, the troubled sea

[212] Christ meant the continual “infl  owing and outfl  owing” of the water of life (John 7:38). 
As long as the believer had her or his eyes on Jesus, taught Argue, the troubled sea 
of life would not cause them to sink beneath its waves. And when distractions would 
come and the breaking point was reached, looking upward in trust, she wrote, “We fall 
back on Jesus. . . . Our hearts rise in adoration, in worship.”
Argue remembered the great meetings of Maria B. Woodworth-Etter. There she 
heard the “heavenly chorus” in worship and received her “fi rst vital taste of the real-
ity of spiritual things.” It is somewhat unclear whether the chorus was the congre-
gation’s singing in tongues united with the heavenly choir or miraculously hearing 
heaven’s choir. Nonetheless, she recognized “a beauty, a harmony, beyond that of 
earth.” Watching “Sister Etter” praying, she wondered if she was about to be “trans-
lated before our very eyes.” Sensing the dynamic presence of the Holy Spirit in wor-

[213] earth.” Watching “Sister Etter” praying, she wondered if she was about to be “trans-
lated before our very eyes.” Sensing the dynamic presence of the Holy Spirit in wor-
ship, Argue expressed the sentiments of other Pentecostals when she said: “The veil 
between heaven and earth becomes very thin at such times.” It is easy to see how she 
gained a reputation as otherworldly. Be that as it may, she was known as a powerful 
intercessor.
SPIRITUAL MENTORS
261
Women in Missions
J
esus Christ’s ﬁ  rst coming was revolutionary for all, but especially for women—who 
were for the most part excluded from Jewish ritual. Baptism was open to everyone, 
as was the call to share the Good News. The woman at the well was perhaps the ﬁ  rst 
female missionary to bring a town to Christ. The ﬁ  rst to be given the mission of spread-
ing the news of the resurrection was a woman. And, on the day of Pentecost—tradition-
ally celebrated only by Jewish males—both men and women received the outpouring

[214] ing the news of the resurrection was a woman. And, on the day of Pentecost—tradition-
ally celebrated only by Jewish males—both men and women received the outpouring 
of the Holy Spirit. Peter’s message from Joel 2:28-29, that “sons and daughters” would 
prophesy, has since been the anchor for many women in ministry, particularly for those 
with roots in the holiness movement of the nineteenth century.
—Barbara Cavaness, “God Calling: Women in Assemblies of God Missions,” 
Pneuma: The Journal of the Society for Pentecostal Studies 
(spring 1994): 50–51.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[215] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
CHARLES S. PRICE
(1887–1947)
“Charles, she is calling for sinners,” a Presbyterian minister said as he put his hand 
on the shoulder of Charles S. Price. “She is calling for people who need to be saved.” 
Aimee Semple McPherson had said: “I want every man and woman in this audience 
who will say, ‘Sister, I am a sinner and I need Jesus and I want you to pray for me,’ 
to stand to your feet.” The one-time law student at Oxford University, lecturer on 
the Chautauqua circuit, and now the dis-
tinguished pastor of First Congregational 
Church in Lodi, California, Price stood to 
confess his need of the Savior. His con-
version turned out to be a highlight of 
McPherson’s 1921 campaign in San Jose, 
California.
A native of England, Price had immi-
grated to Canada in search of his fortune 
and peace, for he was a restless soul. 
Sometime after living in British Colum-
bia, he moved to Spokane, Washington. 
There he visited the Life Line Mission, a

[216] and peace, for he was a restless soul. 
Sometime after living in British Colum-
bia, he moved to Spokane, Washington. 
There he visited the Life Line Mission, a 
Free Methodist ministry. Following this, 
he entered the Methodist ministry. 
Reports eventually reached the mis-
sion about the outpouring of the Holy 
Spirit in Los Angeles. Consequently, he 
decided to attend a Pentecostal prayer 
meeting. But on his way, he met a minister 
who invited him to his home. During their 
conversation, his host discouraged him 
from having anything to do with Pentecostals: “Price, I cannot let you go. You will 
wreck your future—your life. You are young and inexperienced. If you take this step 
you will regret it as long as you live.”
As a result, Price did not go and began to study the writings of “modernist” theolo-
gians and to preach on humanitarian concerns. Eventually, his prestige as a preacher 
grew, and he came to enjoy the benefi  ts of pastoring affl  uent congregations. So when

[217] gians and to preach on humanitarian concerns. Eventually, his prestige as a preacher 
grew, and he came to enjoy the benefi  ts of pastoring affl  uent congregations. So when 
an excited parishioner at his church in Lodi returned from the McPherson campaign 
in San Jose, telling him that he had been “saved—saved—through the blood,” Price 
credited the thousands of testimonies of conversion and healing to “mob psychol-
ogy” and “mental and physical reactions.”
Reluctantly, however, he accepted the invitation of a friend to attend. Follow-
ing his experience at the San Jose service and Spirit baptism, his life and ministry 
262
 Charles S. Price
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[218] dramatically changed. After briefl  y traveling with the McPherson party, he started on 
his own in 1922. He held many meetings across the United States, especially in the 
Pacifi c North west, as well as in British Columbia. Miraculous healings highlighted his 
services, and newspapers readily reported such happenings. In 1923, he conducted 
a particularly successful campaign in Vancouver, British Columbia, where the total 
attendance at the civic arena reached 250,000 in three weeks. The Vancouver Daily World
reported: “People in all walks of life, business men, professional men, laborers and 
tradesmen were packed elbow to elbow in the boxes and balconies.”
From Vancouver, the Price evangelistic party went to Edmonton, Alberta. His 
preaching and praying for the sick again attracted large crowds. On one occasion, 
the ice arena that seated twelve thousand was so crowded that “people climbed onto 
the roof and tried to break their way in. They even smashed windows and then threw

[219] the ice arena that seated twelve thousand was so crowded that “people climbed onto 
the roof and tried to break their way in. They even smashed windows and then threw 
money into the arena to pay for the damage they had done.” When he tried to rent 
the building a year later, the city council said it would approve only if Price took out 
an accident insurance policy that covered everyone who attended.
SPIRITUAL MENTORS
263
The Saints Declare
“T
he seraphs are not sitting up nights measuring God’s servants by their salaries.”
—A. G. Ward, early Pentecostal leader
“Cook your sermons in the oven of prayer.”
—Pentecostal Evangel
“Would it not be better if instead of multiplying organizations we could go back 
to God’s simple, original plan—one soul ablaze for God setting another soul on ﬁ re?”
—Alice E. Luce, founder of Latin American Bible Institute (California)
“Whilst on my knees, this Scripture was given, ‘Faith without works is dead’ (James

[220] —Alice E. Luce, founder of Latin American Bible Institute (California)
“Whilst on my knees, this Scripture was given, ‘Faith without works is dead’ (James 
2:20b). . . . I was then shown that my work was to obey the word of God to me—when-
ever it was given, and whatever it required me to do. I got no further light that day, but 
I rose up with a determination to obey God at any cost.”
—Christine A. Gibson, founder of Zion Bible Institute
“Enoch conversed with God. I want to live in constant conversation with God. I am 
so grateful that from my youth up, God has given me a relish for the Bible. I ﬁ  nd the 
Bible food for my soul. It is strength to the believer. It builds up our character in God. 
And as we receive with meekness the Word of God, we are being changed by the Spirit 
from glory to glory. And by this Book comes faith, for faith cometh by hearing, and 
hearing by the Word of God.”
—Smith Wigglesworth, evangelist

[221] from glory to glory. And by this Book comes faith, for faith cometh by hearing, and 
hearing by the Word of God.”
—Smith Wigglesworth, evangelist
“We can be absolutely certain that if we speak as the oracles of God, as we are 
directed to, He will not let any of our words fall to the ground, but will conﬁ  rm them 
with signs following, setting the seal of Heaven on our utterances.”
—Lilian B. Yeomans, M.D., evangelist
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[222] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
At a later campaign in Winnipeg, the Winnipeg Free Press reported that over eight 
thousand jammed the city auditorium on the last night to hear the evangelist. Price 
later recalled, “What the paper did not know was that I had to climb in through the 
kitchen window to get into the building, for the crowd was so great at the door that 
I could not make my way through the throng.” It was not uncommon for one hundred 
to four hundred people to kneel at the altar during a single service. As he continued 
in itinerant evangelism, he often had to construct wooden tabernacles to hold the 
crowds in smaller communities; he thus contributed to Pentecostal church growth in 
the Pacifi c Northwest. 
Besides being a prolifi  c writer, turning out many books, Price also edited the peri-
odical Golden Grain. Although he never held credentials with the Assemblies of God, 
the faithful held his ministry and spiritual writings in high esteem. His most infl uen-

[223] odical Golden Grain. Although he never held credentials with the Assemblies of God, 
the faithful held his ministry and spiritual writings in high esteem. His most infl uen-
tial book may have been The Real Faith, fi  rst published in 1944. In this book, written 
near the end of his life, he shared his frustration over the vast numbers of people who 
left his services not healed. “I have gone home with the faces of poor supplicating 
people haunting me,” he wrote. “I have seen them do their best to rise from the wheel 
chair, only to sink back again in sorrow and disappointment. I have been moved by 
the groans, cries, and intercessions around altars, until they have lingered with me 
for days after the services were over.”
In the unsuccessful quest for healing, most healing evangelists pointed to the 
failure of the seeker. Price’s contemporary Fred F. Bosworth wrote the popular Christ 
the Healer in 1924. Entitled “Why Some Fail to Receive Healing From Christ,” the last

[224] failure of the seeker. Price’s contemporary Fred F. Bosworth wrote the popular Christ 
the Healer in 1924. Entitled “Why Some Fail to Receive Healing From Christ,” the last 
chapter listed twenty-two reasons, ranging from ignorance about the healing power 
of Christ, to unbelief, to demon possession, to poor stewardship of one’s body, to 
unconfessed sin. When all is considered, according to Bosworth, the seeker is at fault 
since God never intends for his children to experience physical suffering. Not surpris-
ingly, the meaning of faith in the Pentecostal tradition has been problematic, leaving 
the saints with gripping questions about the promise of divine healing in the atone-
ment of Christ: Is there any purpose in suffering? Why doesn’t God heal everyone? 
What accounts for people dying, even those of great faith?
In attempting to answer the question of why God doesn’t heal everyone, Price 
took a more positive stance than Bosworth. He suggested that the problem centers

[225] In attempting to answer the question of why God doesn’t heal everyone, Price 
took a more positive stance than Bosworth. He suggested that the problem centers 
on the difference that many believers make between “faith” and “belief”: “To believe in 
healing is one thing; but to have faith for it is altogether something else.” Accordingly, 
“that is why so many needy people, who believe, come to the Lord on the basis of His 
promises in the Word and try and try and try to affi  rm that they are healed.” Here lies 
the diffi  culty: faith has been made a condition of the mind. 
“Real faith,” however, is a gift from God himself, “a divinely imparted grace of the 
heart. . . . Whenever and wherever this faith is in operation,” he declared, “we shall 
no longer be standing around poor, sick folk hour after hour, rebuking, commanding, 
demanding, struggling, and pleading as in the days of yore. There may be a place for

[226] no longer be standing around poor, sick folk hour after hour, rebuking, commanding, 
demanding, struggling, and pleading as in the days of yore. There may be a place for 
intercession, but it is not in the exercise of faith. . . . The full realization—that it was 
264
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[227] not our ability to believe that made the sickness go, but rather that the faith which 
is of God was imparted—will steal over our soul, like a morning daybreak, to bid the 
night shadows fl ee away.”
Price initially brought comfort to the seeker by saying that human strivings for 
the needed gift of faith will not bring healing. Although he struck a delicate balance 
between human effort and divine grace, he only partially resolved the dilemma. 
ROBERT W. CUMMINGS
(1892–1972)
Director of a missionary language school in British India (he had studied twelve 
languages himself), having master’s degrees in theology and oriental missions, a 
Presbyterian army chaplain in World War I, Robert (Bob) W. Cummings was an unlikely 
candidate for missionary appointment with the Assemblies of God. Yet his spiritual 
journey, complicated by mental illness, changed his life and the lives of many others.
The son and grandson of Presbyte-
rian missionaries to India, Cummings and

[228] journey, complicated by mental illness, changed his life and the lives of many others.
The son and grandson of Presbyte-
rian missionaries to India, Cummings and 
his wife, Mildred (“Mid”), began their fi rst 
term of service in India, the land of his 
birth, in 1920. He went there with “many 
modernistic leanings,” but soon realized 
his lack of spiritual power. While seeking 
for the baptism in the Holy Spirit, he also 
came to a new understanding of Calvary. 
As a result, he made a complete surrender 
to God: “My whole being seemed to be so 
purged of sin and selfi  shness that for four 
or fi  ve months there seemed to be nothing 
in me that could respond to temptation.” 
In 1925, both he and Mid were baptized in 
the Spirit and led others into the same experience.
Cummings became interested in the meaning of Christ’s agony in the Garden 
of Gethsemane. This was prompted in part by Muslim objections that Christ had

[229] Cummings became interested in the meaning of Christ’s agony in the Garden 
of Gethsemane. This was prompted in part by Muslim objections that Christ had 
appeared unwilling to do the will of God because he had prayed, “‘Father, if thou be 
willing, remove this cup from me: nevertheless not my will, but thine, be done’” (Luke 
22:42, KJV). (The name of the Muslim faith, Islam, means “submission” [to God’s 
will].) How then could Jesus Christ be divine and bring atonement for the sins of 
humankind? Cummings grappled for answers, but found none that did justice to the 
biblical record. He struggled to understand why Christ initially recoiled from the will 
of His Father: “What did that cup contain to make the Strong Son of God shrink from 
it in sorrow and amazement and horror?” This led him to pray, “God, . . . give me an 
understanding of the agony in the garden, and of the cross, so that I might be able to 
answer the questions of the inquirers.”
SPIRITUAL MENTORS
265

[230] understanding of the agony in the garden, and of the cross, so that I might be able to 
answer the questions of the inquirers.”
SPIRITUAL MENTORS
265
Robert and Mildred Cummings
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[231] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
The doctors said overwork caused his physical and mental breakdown in 1932, 
which required him to leave India. To this could be added the toll on his health taken 
by malaria. Without doubting the truthfulness of these explanations, he also knew 
“that God allowed me to pass through a nervous breakdown, and immediately after 
delivering me, illuminated my mind to picture and understand something of our 
Lord’s experiences in the garden, and their bearing on the nature of redemption’s 
victory.”
Like John of the Cross, a sixteenth-century mystic, Cummings began to expe-
rience the descent into the “dark night of the soul.” For the fi  rst three months, he 
seemed to lose all willpower and “became the prey of the most terribly vile and 
blasphemous evil powers. . . . Horrible and obscene suggestions and imaginations 
poured in an unceasing fl  ood through my consciousness.” Sleep became impossi-

[232] blasphemous evil powers. . . . Horrible and obscene suggestions and imaginations 
poured in an unceasing fl  ood through my consciousness.” Sleep became impossi-
ble without medication. Finally, “I felt as though I had been dragged through the 
sewers of hell.” All of the joys he had experienced in the Holy Spirit had now left 
him.
His worst fears were soon realized: The devil seemed to ask him, “Do you think, 
after the Lord has fi lled you once, and now that I have trapped you and fl ooded your 
soul with all this evil, that the Lord could ever cleanse you and take you back again?” 
Reluctantly, he agreed, believing that he had committed the unpardonable sin; all 
hope had vanished. In the words of John of the Cross, “The soul feels itself to be so 
impure and miserable that it believes God to be against it, and thinks that it has set 
itself up against God . . . that God has cast it away.”
After two years of suffering, which included time spent in New York mental hos-

[233] itself up against God . . . that God has cast it away.”
After two years of suffering, which included time spent in New York mental hos-
pitals, Cummings began to listen and internalize the Scripture promise pressed on 
him by several friends: “I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee” (Hebrews 13:5). For 
the fi  rst time in two years, on October 4, 1934, he fell to his knees and began to pray: 
“‘Lord,’ I said, ‘I am ashamed even to get into an attitude of prayer. I have been so 
resentful. My mind and heart and being have been so fi  lled with things which must be 
more repulsive to Thee than they are to me. I know now that there is no hope for me. 
I don’t believe you could ever take me back. But, Lord, I wonder if I could be wrong? 
You see in what terrible darkness and hopelessness every moment of my experience 
is spent. Lord, if there is anything you can do for me, won’t you do it? I would pray

[234] You see in what terrible darkness and hopelessness every moment of my experience 
is spent. Lord, if there is anything you can do for me, won’t you do it? I would pray 
if I could, but I can’t pray. There are no words to describe what I feel. Anyway, I don’t 
even feel. My heart is like a lump of stone.’”
He remembered that deep in his consciousness “a chorus began to sing.” It was 
line 2 of the song “In Jesus” that suddenly became illuminated with meaning. Written 
by James Procter, a former atheist who became a Christian, it reads:
My soul is night, my heart is steel;
I cannot see, I cannot feel;
For light, for life, I must appeal
In simple faith to Jesus.
266
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[235] Then, “as the last word sang itself out in the silence of my heart, I knew HE stood 
with me. He gathered me in His arms and brought me into a place of nearness that 
I had never known before. His precious blood cleansed away all the stain and sin, all 
the feeling of evil, all the effect of that terrible experience. . . . The fetters snapped and 
I was free. O the unspeakable joy of that deliverance!”
Sometime later, while staying in New York City, Cummings rose early one morn-
ing. “While I was praying,” he recalled, “it seemed as though God took me by the hand 
into the garden of His agony, and showed me His Son there. My mind was astonished 
at what I saw. The Son of God appeared to be crushed. It seemed that He could not 
stand the horror of the thing that confronted Him.” Asking God what could have been 
in the cup that nearly overwhelmed Jesus, the Lord replied, “Do you not remember 
the terror through which you passed during the fi  rst months of your nervous break-

[236] in the cup that nearly overwhelmed Jesus, the Lord replied, “Do you not remember 
the terror through which you passed during the fi  rst months of your nervous break-
down? Do you not remember calling out, ‘O God, it is impossible for me to endure 
another moment of this awful horror’? I was allowing you to taste a little, a very little, 
of the cup that My Son drank to its dregs, the cup of the world’s iniquity and sin.” 
In the early 1940s the Cummingses became affi  liated with the Assemblies of God 
and were invited to join the CBI faculty, Bob as director of missions and Mid as an 
instructor in English and Hindi. 
For the rest of his life and ministry, Cummings shared his insights into Christ’s 
sufferings in Gethsemane. Along with his uncommon discernment in the operation 
of the gifts of the Spirit in worship, his message of Christ as the sin-bearer for the 
redemption of lost humanity left a deep imprint on many Pentecostals, especially his 
students.
HATTIE HAMMOND

[237] of the gifts of the Spirit in worship, his message of Christ as the sin-bearer for the 
redemption of lost humanity left a deep imprint on many Pentecostals, especially his 
students.
HATTIE HAMMOND
(1907–1994)
While Hattie Hammond was speaking 
at a Deeper Life convention in Indianapolis, 
a minister on the platform stood to his feet, 
raised his hands, and with tears rolling down 
his face, cried out: “O God, curse everything 
within me that will not yield to you!” Not only 
were many people converted in her services, 
but thousands went away inspired to com-
pletely consecrate themselves to Christ.
“Ultimately we shall be brought into the 
immediate presence of God,” she said. “But 
how precious is the foretaste now, when we 
can enter in behind the veil into the pres-
ence of God, there to live, there to move, and 
there to abide—living in the heavenlies with 
God, with the Lord Jesus Christ.” Pentecostals 
SPIRITUAL MENTORS
267
 Hattie Hammond

[238] ence of God, there to live, there to move, and 
there to abide—living in the heavenlies with 
God, with the Lord Jesus Christ.” Pentecostals 
SPIRITUAL MENTORS
267
 Hattie Hammond
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[239] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
fl ocked to hear Hammond preach as she traveled across the country from her home 
in Maryland.
Ordained in 1927 at age twenty, her ministry lasted an incredible sixty-seven 
years. Though healed of typhoid fever as a young girl, she had struggled spiritually 
as a teenager until she visited a tent revival sponsored by Bethel Assembly of God in 
Hagerstown, Maryland. While sitting on the back row, she heard the pastor from the 
front of the tent praying, “Ooooh God, Ooooh God.” 
“Every time he would say [this,] it would go through every part of my being. It 
just seemed to feed me somehow, bring something to me. And I said, ‘That’s what 
I want, whatever that man has, that’s what I want.’” Observing her interest, the visiting 
evangelist, John J. Ashcroft, went and sat beside her and prayed with her. Her conver-
sion and Spirit baptism at that meeting changed her life. She began to witness to her

[240] evangelist, John J. Ashcroft, went and sat beside her and prayed with her. Her conver-
sion and Spirit baptism at that meeting changed her life. She began to witness to her 
friends and, at age sixteen, she dedicated her life to full-time ministry.
Ashcroft and his wife began to mentor Hammond and invited her to accompany 
them to Martinsburg, West Virginia, where he was scheduled to preach. By Pente-
costal standards, the services seemed dry and without demonstration of the power 
of God. Finally, before a Saturday evening service, he invited her to preach. While 
the congregation sang, Hammond desperately prayed to receive a message from the 
Lord. He “dropped into her heart” the verse, “O foolish Galatians, who hath bewitched 
you, that ye should not obey the truth [?]” (Galatians 3:1, KJV). 
Stepping to the pulpit, she quoted the verse, paused momentarily, and then 
quoted it again. Without being able to launch into a sermon, she looked at the con-

[241] Stepping to the pulpit, she quoted the verse, paused momentarily, and then 
quoted it again. Without being able to launch into a sermon, she looked at the con-
gregation and said, “Friends, if you get nothing else from this service tonight except 
the word of God, I want you to get the Word of God, so I am going to read this again.” 
After the third reading, a backslidden woman cried out, “O God, have mercy on 
me!” The woman went forward for prayer; her repentance brought a revival that lasted 
for several months.
While still in her twenties, Hammond became one of the best-known spiritual 
mentors in the Pentecostal movement. She eventually spoke in churches of many 
denominations, camp meetings, Bible institutes, Deeper Life conventions in North 
America, and more than thirty countries overseas. In Oakland, California, she told an 
audience that there were seven in her evangelistic party: “Father, Jesus, Angel of the 
Lord, Holy Spirit, Goodness, Mercy, and Self!”
HERBERT BUFFUM

[242] audience that there were seven in her evangelistic party: “Father, Jesus, Angel of the 
Lord, Holy Spirit, Goodness, Mercy, and Self!”
HERBERT BUFFUM
(1879–1939)
His songs were sung by Nazarenes, Baptists, Methodists, Presbyterians, and 
Pentecostals, among others. Upon his death, the Los Angeles Times called him “The 
King of Gospel Song Writers,” saying that “what Stephen Foster did for American 
folklore, Herbert Buffum did for its homely religious sentiments; he expressed it in 
simple musical strains that all could understand.” Although many people having a 
variety of gifts have enriched Pentecostal spirituality, music has always been central. 
268
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[243] Indeed, while others refused 
the use of musical instruments 
in their services in an attempt 
to restore the New Testament 
church (e.g., the noninstrumen-
tal Churches of Christ), Pente-
costal congregations became 
noted for orchestras and skilled 
musicians.
No one denomination can 
claim Herbert Buffum. Both 
Herbert and Lillie had Method-
ist backgrounds and identifi ed 
variously with the Nazarenes, 
Volunteers of America, and the 
Church of God in Christ. Her-
bert never joined the Assem-
blies of God, but Lillie did. 
Yet his was a familiar name 
from the many songbooks 
that carried his more than one 
thousand published compositions. Always on the move—every fi  ve weeks for many 
years—the Buffums sang and preached across the country in churches, camp meet-
ings, and skid row missions. By 1918, their diaries revealed that ten thousand people 
had come to Christ in their services.
Among Buffum’s many songs were “Lift Me Up Above the Shadows,” written

[244] ings, and skid row missions. By 1918, their diaries revealed that ten thousand people 
had come to Christ in their services.
Among Buffum’s many songs were “Lift Me Up Above the Shadows,” written 
after the death of his mother; “I’m Going Thro’, Jesus,” when he had doubts about 
SPIRITUAL MENTORS
269
Demon-Inspired Music
A
rthur Rodzinski, conductor of the New York Philharmonic Orchestra, has made this 
statement: “The style of boogie-woogie which appeals to hep cats is the greatest 
cause of delinquency among American youth today.”
Why is this? It is because there is a strong demon inﬂ  uence, without a doubt, 
behind modern jazz and the jitterbug frenzy which it produces. Musicians have traced 
its origin to the drum-beating, dancing demon worshipers of pagan jungles. An author-
ity declares that to achieve the height of jazz perfection the player must be in a trance 
in which he wanders off into a world of his own. Anyone with spiritual discernment can

[245] ity declares that to achieve the height of jazz perfection the player must be in a trance 
in which he wanders off into a world of his own. Anyone with spiritual discernment can 
sense the demonic power behind it when he hears some of this swing “music” come 
over the radio, and it is little wonder that young people who listen to it by the hour drift 
into all kinds of sin.
—“Demon-Inspired Music,” Pentecostal Evangel (May 27, 1944): 12.
Herbert Buffum
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[246] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
continuing in the ministry; and the popular “I’m Going Higher,” after seeing an air-
plane overhead (an uncommon sight in 1923). This last song became popular in 
youth services. The song leader would sometimes have the audience sing the chorus 
of the song seated, then standing, and fi  nally mounted on their chairs (on outings, 
they might stand on picnic tables).
Buffum’s compositions touched the chords of joy and sorrow in the Christian life 
and often reminded believers of their heavenly hope. In many ways, he shaped early 
twentieth-century evangelical and Pentecostal worship patterns. He had no formal 
training in music; nevertheless, his self-instruction and unusual ability enabled him 
to learn virtually any keyboard or stringed instrument.
With enormous powers of concentration, Buffum could write songs (music and 
lyrics) during church services, in hotel lobbies, on trains, and in train stations, even

[247] With enormous powers of concentration, Buffum could write songs (music and 
lyrics) during church services, in hotel lobbies, on trains, and in train stations, even 
while his four children climbed all over him. According to his daughter Lois, only 
one thing could throw off his concentration: singing another song. If no piano was 
available, Buffum would improvise on a table or another piece of furniture and tap 
out the song. He would even invite congregations to get into the act. First, he would 
have them suggest song titles. Writing the suggestions on a chalkboard, he would 
then have them vote on their top choice. Finally, he would compose a matching song 
on the spot.
In Huntington Beach, California, an eleven-year-old girl suggested the title 
“When I Take My Vacation in Heaven.” Although the congregation didn’t choose this 
one, Buffum was intrigued by it. By the next morning, he had composed the song.

[248] “When I Take My Vacation in Heaven.” Although the congregation didn’t choose this 
one, Buffum was intrigued by it. By the next morning, he had composed the song. 
Although he usually sold the rights to a song for fi  ve dollars—just enough for food 
and basic expenses—he sold this one for one hundred dollars; it became immensely 
popular, moving into the secular market.
The life and ministry of Herbert Buffum epitomizes the church’s troubadour, 
those who itinerated with the gospel in song. Their melodies and choruses not only 
enriched worship, they also infl  uenced day-to-day life, leaving a lyric in the heart that 
enabled the believer to maintain a walk of faith. Their legacy of music blessed gener-
ations of people in all walks of life in congregations around the world.
WILLIAM I. EVANS
(1887–1954)
“We looked to him as a champion of our movement in the things of the Spirit 
and of the old paths of Pentecost,” wrote Milton T. Wells on behalf of the faculty of

[249] WILLIAM I. EVANS
(1887–1954)
“We looked to him as a champion of our movement in the things of the Spirit 
and of the old paths of Pentecost,” wrote Milton T. Wells on behalf of the faculty of 
Eastern Bible Institute in Green Lane, Pennsylvania, after hearing of the death of “W. 
I.” Evans. “One of his greatest joys in the eternal world will be to see the stamp of 
the Spirit which under God he left upon so many thousands of lives either directly or 
indirectly.” Few have had a greater formative infl  uence on the Pentecostal spirituality 
of Assemblies of God ministers than “Brother Evans.”
Born in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, to devout Methodist parents, he came to 
Christ at age eleven while kneeling at his mother’s knee in the kitchen of their home. 
270
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[250] After his conversion, however, he became attracted to the 
Christian and Missionary Alliance. Called to the min-
istry, Evans enrolled at A. B. Simpson’s Missionary 
Training Institute in Nyack, New York, in 1906. The 
next year at the Alliance’s convention in Nyack, he 
and many others were baptized in the Spirit and 
spoke in tongues.
Like other Alliance Pentecostals who remained, 
he went on with his ministry of preaching. While pas-
toring in Richmond, Virginia, he also studied for three 
years at the University of Richmond. During this 
time, he met his wife, Hilda Mae Lindberg; 
they were married in 1914. In the same year, 
he left the Alliance due to its rejection of 
the doctrine of tongues as initial evidence. 
After pastoring the Ossining (New York) 
Gospel Assembly, he moved to Newark, 
New Jersey, where he joined the faculty of Bethel Bible Training School. Although 
the board of the independent Bethel Pentecostal Assembly in Newark sponsored the

[251] New Jersey, where he joined the faculty of Bethel Bible Training School. Although 
the board of the independent Bethel Pentecostal Assembly in Newark sponsored the 
school, many of its faculty members and students were members of the Assemblies of 
God. Evans served as principal in the last years of the school’s existence (1923–1929).
SPIRITUAL MENTORS
271
William I. Evans
Had I But One Hour to Live
W
hat in all the realm of life is worthy of attention except the personal constant pres-
ence of the Lord Jesus Christ! Only those things which contribute vitally toward 
seeking Him and discovering new beauties in Him are worth- while. If in this ﬂ  eeting 
ephemeral day called life, we can reach Him in a mighty grasp of faith that brings Him 
intimately near and makes Him supremely real, we have wrung from earthly walking 
the only thing worthy of attention.
To apprehend Him in faith’s close grip, to be apprehended by Him in love’s strong

[252] the only thing worthy of attention.
To apprehend Him in faith’s close grip, to be apprehended by Him in love’s strong 
grasp, to be constrained then in the embrace of His mighty anointing, urged by an 
unquenchable zeal, to rescue others from the night and present them complete in 
God’s salvation, this is the sum of life below.
The heart cries for adjustment to God and His will with a passion that blinds the 
eyes to all human standards and to every admirable achievement or apparent suc-
cess of our brethren. Nothing short of Christ Himself becomes the pattern, nothing less 
than all the fullness of God, abiding, pulsating, motivating, accomplishing, can stay 
the longing or still the crying. The soul chafes at every earthly bond and, awakened to 
a strength hitherto unrealized, presses out in quest of [the most intense] reality and 
highest, holiest, satisfying achievement.
—W. I. Evans, “Had I But One Hour to Live,” 
Pentecostal Evangel (April 26, 1941): 5.

[253] highest, holiest, satisfying achievement.
—W. I. Evans, “Had I But One Hour to Live,” 
Pentecostal Evangel (April 26, 1941): 5.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[254] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
272
The question and answer column for readers of Today’s Pentecostal Evangel ﬁ  rst 
appeared in the January 1, 1916 issue of the Weekly Evangel, during a time of doctrinal 
strife in the Assemblies of God over the correct understanding of the Godhead. Questions 
had to be sincere (“not for controversy”), brief, and about religious matters “that can be 
answered from the Bible and History.” Inquirers were told speciﬁ cally not to ask for the 
interpretation of dreams and visions since “we do not have the gift to interpret these.” 
E. N. Bell provided the answers until his death in 1923; Gospel Publishing House 
then made them available in book form as Questions and Answers. E. S. Williams later 
wrote the columns and his “Your Questions” appeared in 1968. Years later, the column 
resurfaced with Stanley Horton as the writer. It has been a popular means of providing 
spiritual advice for believers.

[255] When Bethel “merged” with CBI (that is, the Evans and Ralph M. Riggs families 
moved to Springfi  eld), he continued his training of Spirit-fi  lled young people. Evans 
is remembered for his life of prayer and keen insight into the moving of the Spirit, 
including the operation of the Spirit’s gifts in worship. 
One of his favorite illustrations, which he shared with freshmen, referred to a trip 
he had taken through Kansas. He had observed that the “wheat stalks yielded even 
to the slightest moving of the air. To him, this was a picture of what should be true 
in a Christian’s life. It should be yielded to God, and so sensitive to Him, that the 
slightest movement of the Spirit would be obeyed.” Evans himself modeled this life 
in the Spirit.
His daily schedule began early with extended prayer, Bible study, and meditation. 
Next, he went to his offi ce to pray with the faculty before the chapel service. He was

[256] in the Spirit.
His daily schedule began early with extended prayer, Bible study, and meditation. 
Next, he went to his offi ce to pray with the faculty before the chapel service. He was 
always there thirty minutes ahead of his colleagues and never looked up as they came 
into the room. However, he sensed that the spiritual atmosphere intensifi  ed as the 
number increased: “As each digit is added, the power is multiplied.”
Prepared now for the morning chapel, the faculty and Dean Evans took their seats 
on the platform. In leading the service, he encouraged times of prayer and “waiting 
before the Lord.” When revival came, he kept things moving in the right direction by 
urging the students to “hold steady.” One student said this “brought many a service 
of victory and blessing.” Hence, when problems arose, he was able to keep the Spirit 
from being “quenched” (1 Thessalonians 5:19, KJV). Evans also understood the mean-

[257] of victory and blessing.” Hence, when problems arose, he was able to keep the Spirit 
from being “quenched” (1 Thessalonians 5:19, KJV). Evans also understood the mean-
ing of “the joy of the Lord.” There were times of Pentecostal blessing when he would 
begin to “laugh in the Spirit.” Students recalled how the chapel reverberated with his 
hearty laugh. 
For W. I. Evans, affectionately known as “Pop” Evans, holiness and spirituality 
went hand in hand. Those who claim Spirit baptism but haven’t submitted their wills 
and ambitions to Christ will never have “a Holy Ghost ministry.” 
“You may have a spurt here and there,” he wrote, “like the shooting off of a fi  re-
cracker, or the detonating of a skyrocket, but it will fi  zzle out and come down with a 
thud. Holy Ghost ministry is by Christ’s Lordship.
RECOMMENDED READING
Argue, Zelma. Contending for the Faith. 2d rev. ed. Winnipeg: Messenger of God Publishing 
House, 1928.

[258] thud. Holy Ghost ministry is by Christ’s Lordship.
RECOMMENDED READING
Argue, Zelma. Contending for the Faith. 2d rev. ed. Winnipeg: Messenger of God Publishing 
House, 1928.
———. Garments of Strength. Springfi  eld, Mo.: Gospel Publishing House, 1935.
Blumhofer, Edith L. “Life on Faith Lines: Early Homes and Early Pentecostal Values.” Parts 1 
and 2. Assemblies of God Heritage 10 (summer 1990): 10–12, 22; 10 (fall 1990): 5–7, 21–22.
Craig, Marion. Prepared by God: Robert Cummings. Springfi  eld, Mo.: Foreign Missions 
Department, n.d.
Cummings, Robert W. Gethsemane. Springfi  eld, Mo.: By the author, 1944.
———. Unto You Is the Promise. Springfi  eld, Mo.: Gospel Publishing House, n.d.
SPIRITUAL MENTORS
273
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[259] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
Enloe, Tim. “Dr. Charles S. Price: His Life, Ministry and Infl uence.” Assemblies of God Heritage 28 
(2008): 4–13.
Evans, Paul A. Letters from “Pop” Evans. Springfi  eld, Mo.: Central Bible College Alumni Associa-
tion, 1973.
Evans, W. I. This River Must Flow! Springfi  eld, Mo.: Gospel Publishing House, 1954. 
Follette, John Wright. Arrows of Truth. Springfi  eld, Mo.: Gospel Publishing House, 1969. 
Gohr, Glenn. “Two Pioneers of Pentecost in Milwaukee: Joseph and Helen Wannenmacher.” 
 Assemblies of God Heritage 9 (spring 1989): 11–12, 20. 
Hammond, Hattie. “Christ Bringing Us to God.” Pentecostal Evangel (24 April 1937): 2–3.
Price, Charles S. The Real Faith. 1940. Reprint, Plainfi  eld, N.J.: Logos International, 1972.
———. The Story of My Life. Pasadena, Calif.: By the author, 1935.
Shearer, Sheryl. “Zelma E. Argue: Handmaiden of the Lord.” Assemblies of God Heritage 22 (spring 
2002): 18–23.

[260] ———. The Story of My Life. Pasadena, Calif.: By the author, 1935.
Shearer, Sheryl. “Zelma E. Argue: Handmaiden of the Lord.” Assemblies of God Heritage 22 (spring 
2002): 18–23.
St. John of the Cross. Dark Night of the Soul. New York: Doubleday, 1990.
Warner, Wayne E. “Herbert Buffum: The King of Gospel Song Writers.” Assemblies of God Heritage 
6 (fall 1986): 11–14, 16.
274
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
================================================================================


⚙️ Second retrieval pass triggered due to incomplete response.
Added 3 new docs.
  - ./docs\GaryB.McGeeChar_2014__PeopleoftheSpiritTheA (121-200).pdf p.8
  - ./docs\Divine_Healing.pdf p.4
  - ./docs\GaryB.McGeeChar_2014__PeopleoftheSpiritTheA (401-500).pdf p.99
📄 Expanded Context Sent to Model:
[1] 1 
WOMEN IN MINISTERIAL LEADERSHIP 
(Adopted by the General Presbytery in session August 4–5, 2025) 
 
 
Summary 
 
The Bible provides numerous examples of women serving in a variety of ministries. Their 
work includes both speaking and leading among God’s people. And since the birth of the 
Assemblies of God, women gifted by the Holy Spirit have served as pastors, missionaries, 
teachers, and evangelists. The Assemblies of God recognizes the spiritual gifting of 
women in all aspects and levels of church ministry as revealed in the Scriptures. 
 
Introduction 
 
The Assemblies of God was founded with a powerful experience of the s upernatural 
manifestations and gifts of the Holy Spirit. Pentecostals believe that the outpouring of the 
Spirit in the early twentieth century continues the fulfillment of the prophecy, “Your sons 
and daughters will prophesy. . . . In those days I will pour out my Spirit even on servants—
men and women alike” (Joel 2:28–29; cf. Acts 2:16–18).

[2] and daughters will prophesy. . . . In those days I will pour out my Spirit even on servants—
men and women alike” (Joel 2:28–29; cf. Acts 2:16–18).
1 Joel’s prophecy demonstrates 
the inclusion of women in the ministries of the new covenant age. 
 
Since the earliest days of the Fellowship, spiritual gifting has been clear in the ministries 
of women. O utstanding female ministers  pioneered and directed a broad spectrum of 
ministries. Some of those ministered in partnership with their  husbands. At times , 
husbands worked secular jobs  to support the active ministries of their wives. In other 
cases, women chose to forego marriage to better fulfill the ministries to which the Lord 
had called them. Brave women served locally and abroad as missionaries, evangelists, 
church planters, pastors, educators, and in other roles. 
 
The Bible as Final Authority 
 
The history and practice of the Assemblies of God show  that God blesses the public

[3] church planters, pastors, educators, and in other roles. 
 
The Bible as Final Authority 
 
The history and practice of the Assemblies of God show  that God blesses the public 
ministry of women. Yet, debate continues about  the proper role of women in spiritual 
leadership. Since the Bible is our final authority in all matters of faith and practice, we 
must ensure that our stance is founded on Scripture.  What the Bible says should be 
explored as carefully and objectively as possible, using established rules of exegesis and 
interpretation. This paper gives both historical and theological guidance. It also evaluates 
the usual texts used to limit or deny the ministry of women.  
 
Exploring a text ’s original culture and context  is needed to grasp its meaning. For 
instance, 1 Corinthians 7:1 starts with “ Now regarding the questions you asked in your

[4] Exploring a text ’s original culture and context  is needed to grasp its meaning. For 
instance, 1 Corinthians 7:1 starts with “ Now regarding the questions you asked in your 
 
1 Unless otherwise indicated, all Scripture quotations are taken from the Holy Bible, New Living Translation, copyright © 1996, 2004, 
2015 by Tyndale House Foundation. Used by permission of Tyndale House Publishers, Carol Stream, Illinois 60188. All rights 
reserved.

[5] Divine Healing  (Adopted by the General Presbytery in session August 9-11, 2010)   From its inception the General Council of the Assemblies of God has recognized divine healing for the whole person as an important part of the gospel, the good news, which Jesus commissioned His disciples to proclaim. The Assemblies of God constitution in its Statement of Fundamental Truths, section 12, states, “Divine healing is an integral part of the gospel. Deliverance from sickness is provided for in the Atonement, and is the privilege of all believers (Isaiah 53:4,5; Matthew 8:16,17; James 5:14–16).”1  Though it is impossible in a brief paper to cover all the implications of this statement or answer all the questions that are raised concerning it, we shall attempt to show that the statement is scripturally sound. I. Divine Healing Is an Integral Part of the Gospel The ministry of both Jesus and the apostles gives evidence that divine healing was integral to the proclamation of the gospel message.

[6] sound. I. Divine Healing Is an Integral Part of the Gospel The ministry of both Jesus and the apostles gives evidence that divine healing was integral to the proclamation of the gospel message. It was an important witness to Jesus as the revelation of the Father, the promised Messiah, and the Savior from sin (see John 10:37,38). The Bible shows a close connection between the healing ministry of Jesus and His saving, forgiving ministry. His power to heal was actually a witness to His authority to forgive sins (Mark 2:5–12). Frequently the gospel writers testify that His healing miracles parallel His preaching of the gospel, both being the purpose of His ministry (Matthew 4:23; 9:35,36).  People came from all directions both to hear Him and to be healed (Luke 5:15; 6:17,18). He never turned any away but healed all varieties of sicknesses, diseases, deformities, defects, and injuries (Matthew 15:30,31; 21:14). He also delivered people from demons and the problems they caused (Matthew

[7] any away but healed all varieties of sicknesses, diseases, deformities, defects, and injuries (Matthew 15:30,31; 21:14). He also delivered people from demons and the problems they caused (Matthew 4:24).  Jesus recognized that sickness is ultimately the result of the fall of humans into sin, and in some instances may be linked to specific sin (John 5:14) or to the activity of Satan (Luke 13:16). He recognized also, however, that sickness is not always the direct result of specific sin (John 9:2,3). There were times when it was rather an opportunity for God to be glorified (Mark 2:12).  Miracles of healing were an important part of the works God sent Jesus to do (John 9:3,4). This is in line with the Old Testament revelation of God as the Great Physician, the Lord who heals (Exodus 15:26; Psalm 103:3, where the Hebrew participles used in both cases indicate it is God’s nature to heal). Jesus’ ministry showed that divine healing is still a vital part of God’s nature and plan.

[8] 103:3, where the Hebrew participles used in both cases indicate it is God’s nature to heal). Jesus’ ministry showed that divine healing is still a vital part of God’s nature and plan.                                                   1All biblical quotations, unless otherwise indicated, are from the New International Version (NIV).

[9] who would ask in His name (that is, those who recognize His authority and conform themselves to His nature and purposes). God used deacons such as Philip to preach and heal (Acts 8:5–7) and an otherwise unknown disciple, Ananias, to bring healing to Saul (Paul) (Acts 9:12–18).  The gospel message includes the provision of spiritual gifts through the Holy Spirit to the Church, among which are the gifts of healings (1 Corinthians 12:7). All of these gifts, including that of healing, continue to edify or build up the Church and offer hope to every believer. Moreover, James asserts that healing is a normal aspect of the regular meetings of the Church. Whenever the community of faith is gathered, anyone who is sick may                                                  2 “Infirmities,” astheneia, denotes weakness and is often used to speak of sickness and disease (Luke 5:15; Acts 28:9); “Diseases,” nosos, seems to be used synonymously with astheneia here to indicate physical disease or

[10] 2 
letter.” That phrase, “ now regarding,” was repeated by Paul as he answer ed questions 
the Corinthians asked. First Corinthians holds some of Paul’s answers, but it only reveals 
fragments of the Corinthians’ questions. A deeper study of the letter will reconstruct the 
questions they asked.  
 
For Paul’s letters to Timothy, the situation in Ephesus must be understood. Acts 19:8–41 
is one key to understanding. It reveals that magic and the worship of Artemis are parts of 
that situation. Also, Paul told the men in Ephesus to stop arguing during prayer (1 Timothy 
2:8). The Bible includes no other account of Paul giving similar instructions. This was 
likely a problem specific to the Ephesian church . The task of grasping the meaning of  
Scripture requires careful discernment. The reader must discern  between timeless 
theological principles and advice meant for an audience in their unique context. 
 
Some Christian groups disagree  on how certain passages of Scripture should be

[11] 3 
witnesses of the resurrection of Christ. They were instructed to share this great news with 
the disciples (Matthew 28:1–8). 
 
The New Testament shows that women filled important ministry roles after the Day of 
Pentecost as well. Tabitha (Dorcas) started a benevolence ministry (Acts 9:36). One of 
the early house churches met at the home of Lydia (Acts 16:14– 15, 40). Her home also 
seems to have become a base for the Philippian church.  
 
A number of women are named as ministry colleagues.  Paul named two women in 
Philippi, Euodia and Syntyche, as women who “ have contended at my side in the cause 
of the gospel” (Philippians 4:2–3, NIV). In Romans 16, Paul greeted both male and female 
ministry colleagues using the word kopiaō. This term noted the “work” or “labor” of Mary, 
Tryphena, Tryphosa, and Persis (Romans 16:6, 12). Elsewhere, Paul uses kopiaō for the 
labor of ministry (1 Corinthians 16:16; 1 Thessalonians 5:12; 1 Timothy 5:17).

[12] Tryphena, Tryphosa, and Persis (Romans 16:6, 12). Elsewhere, Paul uses kopiaō for the 
labor of ministry (1 Corinthians 16:16; 1 Thessalonians 5:12; 1 Timothy 5:17). 
 
Priscilla is another of Paul’s “co-workers in Christ Jesus” (Romans 16:3–4, NIV). She is 
named with her husband, Aquila, as a teacher of Apollos. The couple “took him aside and 
explained the way of God even more accurately ” (Acts 18:26). Acts also makes it clear 
that Apollos had a strong ministry  of “proving from the Scriptures that Jesus was the 
Messiah” (Acts 1 8:24–28, NIV ). When the ministry team of Priscilla and Aquila  is 
mentioned, she is named first when the names are paired together. This reveals that she 
had the leading role in correcting and instructing this recognized male leader. 
 
Women were active in prophecy in the E arly Church. The Bible points out that Philip ’s 
four unmarried daughters were prophets (Acts 21:8 –9). First Corinthians 11:2 –16 also

[13] Women were active in prophecy in the E arly Church. The Bible points out that Philip ’s 
four unmarried daughters were prophets (Acts 21:8 –9). First Corinthians 11:2 –16 also 
reveals that the men and women of the church were praying and prophesying.  
 
Women were also named as deacons. Phoebe, a leader in the church at Cenchrea, is 
highly commended to the church at Rome by Paul (Romans 16:1– 2). Unfortunately, 
translation biases have obscured Phoebe’s leadership position, calling her just a “servant” 
(KJV, NASB, ESV). Yet Phoebe was diakonos of the church at Cenchrea. Paul regularly 
uses this term for a minister or leader of a church. He also applied it to Jesus Christ, 
Tychicus, Epaphras, Timothy, and his own ministry.  
 
Based on the context, diakonos tends to be translated as “deacon” or “minister.” Some 
translators choose the word “deaconess” (e.g., RSV) despite diakonos being a masculine

[14] Based on the context, diakonos tends to be translated as “deacon” or “minister.” Some 
translators choose the word “deaconess” (e.g., RSV) despite diakonos being a masculine 
noun. So, it seems that diakonos is the title for an official leadership position in the Early 
Church. And the proper translation for Phoebe’ s role is “ deacon” (NIV, NLT, NRSV) or 
“minister.” Also, some translations reveal a bias by referring to Phoebe as being “helpful” 
(NLT) or a “helper” (NASB) of others , including Paul (Romans 16:2).  Based on new 
analysis of ancient Greek manuscripts, Phoebe is called either a prostatis or prostatēs by 
Paul. Both terms are leadership titles.  
 
A final, key example is Paul identifying Junia as an apostle (Romans 16:7). Beginning in 
the thirteenth century, some scholars and translators masculinized her name to Junias. It 
seems they were unwilling to admit that there was a female apostle. The name Junia is

[15] request prayer for healing (5:14). We are assured that divine healing is an ongoing manifestation of the gospel in the current day, and will continue until the return of Jesus. II. Divine Healing Is Provided in the Atonement The ministry of the priests under the Law foreshadowed the ministry of the great High Priest, Jesus Christ, who is able “to sympathize with our weaknesses (astheneia, weakness, sickness, disease, timidity, infirmity)” (Hebrews 4:14,15). The Old Testament priests, through the sprinkling of the blood of the sacrifices, made atonement for the sins of the people.  An examination of the concept of atonement in the Bible shows that in most cases it refers to a ransom price paid for redemption and restoration, which points to the redemption through Christ accomplished by the shedding of His blood in our behalf. The apostle Paul described it this way: “God presented him as a sacrifice of atonement, through faith in his blood” (Romans 3:25).  The phrase, “sacrifice of

[16] the shedding of His blood in our behalf. The apostle Paul described it this way: “God presented him as a sacrifice of atonement, through faith in his blood” (Romans 3:25).  The phrase, “sacrifice of atonement,” translates the Greek hilastērion, which can be also translated expiation, propitiation, atonement, or mercy seat. Leviticus 16 records God’s expectations for Israel’s Day of Atonement and the ministry of the high priest sprinkling the blood of a sin offering on the atonement cover (the solid gold lid on top of the ark of the covenant). The ark contained the stone tablets of the Law, which the people had broken. The broken Law called for judgment and death. But when the blood of a spotless lamb was sprinkled, prophetically anticipating the sinless life of Christ, God saw that sinless life instead of the broken Law and could give mercy and blessing.  The primary purpose of the atonement was cleansing from sin (Leviticus 16:30). It is also clear, however, that atonement brought

[17] life instead of the broken Law and could give mercy and blessing.  The primary purpose of the atonement was cleansing from sin (Leviticus 16:30). It is also clear, however, that atonement brought release from the penalty and consequences of sin in order to bring restoration to God’s blessing and favor. When the people of Israel complained after the judgment that followed the rebellion of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, God sent a plague on the Israelites. Moses sent Aaron out into the midst of the congregation, where he made atonement for them, and the plague was stopped (Numbers 16:47,48). The Law of Moses required that when the men of Israel were numbered, they were each to give a half shekel atonement offering for their redemption and to prevent a plague from coming upon them (Exodus 30:11–16). Atonement thus provided cleansing from sin and its consequences, including sickness and disease.  The Bible makes it clear that people could not pay the price for their redemption, so God out of

[18] Atonement thus provided cleansing from sin and its consequences, including sickness and disease.  The Bible makes it clear that people could not pay the price for their redemption, so God out of His love and for the glory of His own name provided the ultimate atonement (Romans 3:25; see also Psalms 65:3; 78:38; 79:9; Romans 3:21–28). All this was accomplished through Christ at Calvary (John 3:14–16). There He made a full atonement for the whole person. The New Testament speaks of this as redemption, which has essentially the same meaning as atonement. Through Christ we have received redemption and the forgiveness of sins (Romans 3:24; Ephesians 1:7; Colossians 1:14; Hebrews 9:15).

[19] 4 
found more than 250 times in Rome alone. However, the masculine form Junias  is 
unknown in any Greco-Roman source. This deliberate change of the Greek has now been 
corrected in the texts used by pastors and scholars.  
 
Scripture clearly advocates for  women as ministers and leaders . Instances of women 
filling leadership roles in the Bible should be taken as a divinely approved pattern. It 
should not be seen as an exception to divine decrees.

[20] Redemption, accomplished through the atonement of Christ, provides reconciliation for sin and its consequences. Even where sickness is not the direct result of specific sin, it is still in the world because of sin. Therefore it is among the works of the devil Jesus came to destroy (1 John 3:8) and is thus included in the Atonement.  From the parallel between redemption and atonement, we see that provision for the healing of our bodies is part of the redemption spoken of in Romans 8:23. We receive the forgiveness of sins now in connection with the redemption of our souls. We shall receive the redemption of our bodies when we are caught up to meet the Lord and are changed into His likeness (1 Corinthians 15:51–54; 2 Corinthians 5:1–4; 1 John 3:2). Divine healing now is a foretaste of this, and, like all the blessings of the gospel, flows from the Atonement. III. Divine Healing Is a Gift of God’s Grace for All Just as salvation is by grace through faith (Ephesians 2:8), so all God’s

[21] and, like all the blessings of the gospel, flows from the Atonement. III. Divine Healing Is a Gift of God’s Grace for All Just as salvation is by grace through faith (Ephesians 2:8), so all God’s blessings and gifts are ours by His grace, or unmerited favor. They cannot be earned or deserved. It should be noted that instead of demanding healing from Jesus, the New Testament records that people came asking for His compassionate ministry. They did not look on healing as their right, but as a gracious privilege extended to them.  That we cannot earn God’s blessings, including divine healing, should make us realize the importance of cultivating our life in the Spirit, for the Spirit will “give life to your mortal bodies,” and that is our real hope (Romans 8:11). In fact, even though outwardly we are wasting away, inwardly we are being renewed day by day (2 Corinthians 4:16).  It is this inner renewal that makes us best able to have the faith to receive the gift of divine healing. To the

[22] we are wasting away, inwardly we are being renewed day by day (2 Corinthians 4:16).  It is this inner renewal that makes us best able to have the faith to receive the gift of divine healing. To the woman healed of her twelve-year-long bleeding, Jesus said, “Your faith has healed you” (Mark 5:34). Paul at Lystra, when he saw that listening to his preaching had brought faith to be healed into the heart of a cripple, commanded him to stand up (Acts 14:9,10). Faith is seen also in the Roman centurion who recognized the authority of Christ’s word for the healing of his servant (Matthew 8:5–13) and the Canaanite woman who believed in Jesus for the healing of her daughter (Mark 7:24–30; Matthew 15:28).  That divine healing comes through faith is further confirmed by the fact that unbelief hindered its reception at Nazareth (Mark 6:5,6) and at the foot of the Mount of Transfiguration (Matthew 17:14–20). James 5:15 promises that the prayer of faith offered for the sick by the elders of the

[23] its reception at Nazareth (Mark 6:5,6) and at the foot of the Mount of Transfiguration (Matthew 17:14–20). James 5:15 promises that the prayer of faith offered for the sick by the elders of the church will make the sick well and the Lord will raise them up. Faith, then, receives healing through the simple Word of the Lord. But Jesus did not turn away from those who had little faith or who did not seem to express any faith at all. Those who are sick often find it is not easy to express faith, and Jesus did a variety of things to help them. Some He touched (Mark 1:41; 8:22), took their hands (Mark 1:31; Luke 14:4), or laid His hands upon them (Mark 6:5; 8:25; Luke 4:40; 13:13). Others He helped by a variety of acts, some of which called for faith and obedience on their part (Mark 7:33; 8:23).

[24] The missionaries introduced in this chapter illustrated this passion and labored 
in a variety of contexts. In different ways, they were all pioneers. Noel Perkin served in 
Argentina for several years, became the missionary secretary, and published a policy 
manual for missionaries to improve working relationships. In Burkina Faso, Arthur 
E. Wilson helped lay the groundwork for a strong national church. Ralph D. Williams 
started a model Bible institute in El Salvador. Jessie Wengler evangelized in Japan, a 
non-Christian country noted for its resistance to the gospel. Finally, drug addicts and 
other needy persons heard the gospel from Marie Stephany in North China.
NOEL PERKIN
1893–1979
That Noel Perkin fl  unked his Latin exam proved fortu-
nate for the Assemblies of God. Otherwise, he might have 
spent his life as a dentist in England. Perkin was born into 
a moderately well-to-do English family who were mem-
bers of the Wesleyan Methodist Church. Although his par-

[25] spent his life as a dentist in England. Perkin was born into 
a moderately well-to-do English family who were mem-
bers of the Wesleyan Methodist Church. Although his par-
ents had sent him to a church boarding school at Cam-
bridge, he rebelled against their faith. Now with a career in 
dentistry doomed, he turned to banking. Like other young 
Englishmen of his day, he left England to seek his fortune 
in some outpost of the British Empire. He got as far as 
Canada, where he settled in Toronto to work at the branch 
offi  ce of the Bank of Montreal.
Unfortunately, he made friends with other young men of his standing and lived 
“a careless life, drinking and smoking as was customary among that group.” But after 
being diagnosed with tuberculosis, he began to think about the welfare of his soul. 
Taking up residence in a boarding house run by a former missionary, he knelt in prayer 
one day in his room, “telling the Lord that I believed He was alive and if this were

[26] Taking up residence in a boarding house run by a former missionary, he knelt in prayer 
one day in his room, “telling the Lord that I believed He was alive and if this were 
true, He was interested in those who are sick and needy, and I asked Him to heal me 
of my disease. I felt that was a turning point and believe that at that moment I was 
born into a new life.”
After his conversion and healing, he attended services at the Christian and Mis-
sionary Alliance church in Toronto. His fellowshipping with Pentecostal believers 
who had formerly belonged to the Alliance, however, led to his Spirit baptism. He 
was then spiritually mentored by the leader of the group, Christian Schoonmaker, a 
missionary to India residing in Canada at the time. 
Harry Turner, an Alliance missionary who had received the Pentecostal baptism 
with speaking in tongues, invited Perkin and another friend to join him in Argen-

[27] Harry Turner, an Alliance missionary who had received the Pentecostal baptism 
with speaking in tongues, invited Perkin and another friend to join him in Argen-
tina. So in 1918 Perkin did just that. Since the three missionaries worked with little 
pledged support, they decided on chicken farming for additional support. Appar-
ently they were not called to be chicken farmers; the hens died from an amoebic 
disease. 
HARVESTING IN THE FIELDS OF THE LORD
211
Noel Perkin
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[28] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
After three years and a diminished savings account, Perkin returned to Canada. 
While visiting the Rochester Bible Training School in Rochester, New York, he met 
Ora Blanchard, who later became his wife. After several years of pastoral work, Perkin 
moved to Springfi  eld to work at Gospel Publishing House and the Foreign Missions 
Department. The Council needed his expertise in bookkeeping. The department had 
previously forwarded designated offerings to the intended missionaries and then 
sent small yellow receipts to the donors. Duplicates were fi  led in alphabetical order 
in an envelope box. Incredibly, hundreds of thousands of dollars were processed by 
this means. Obviously, the time had come for a more effi  cient and reliable procedure. 
When Perkin arrived, he installed a proper bookkeeping system with an account for 
every missionary.
At the time of his permanent appointment as missionary secretary in 1927,

[29] When Perkin arrived, he installed a proper bookkeeping system with an account for 
every missionary.
At the time of his permanent appointment as missionary secretary in 1927,  
Assemblies of God missions showed remarkable growth. Giving since 1925 had 
jumped 28 percent, reaching three hundred thousand dollars, and the missionary 
roster had gone up 18 percent to 277. Although only thirty-four years old, Perkin 
brought several strengths to the offi  ce: missionary and pastoral experience, fi nancial 
skills, a warm and winning personality, and a capacity to adjust to new situations and 
move ahead with the times. 
His fi  rst major achievement appeared with the publication of a policy manual in 
1931. Though only twenty-eight pages long, it contained a philosophy of missions, 
a brief historical sketch, and a statement of departmental policies. When listing the 
qualifi cations for missionary appointment, it stipulated that priority went to those

[30] a brief historical sketch, and a statement of departmental policies. When listing the 
qualifi cations for missionary appointment, it stipulated that priority went to those 
having defi  nite calls from God, proven effectiveness in ministry, and commitment to 
“scriptural” methods of missions. But regardless of all these factors, life in the Spirit 
and holiness of character remained foremost.
The host of people who entered the Assemblies of God from the Alliance were 
among A. B. Simpson’s best pupils, having been schooled in his vision for missions 
212
Missionary Policies
Term of Service:
It should be the resolution of the missionary, God permitting, that his entire life 
shall be spent in missionary service. . . . Should it be necessary for the missionary’s 
health or for the good of the work to return to the homeland, a furlough will be consid-
ered on the advice of the Field Council. However, the nature of our organization does

[31] health or for the good of the work to return to the homeland, a furlough will be consid-
ered on the advice of the Field Council. However, the nature of our organization does 
not permit the guaranteeing of a furlough after any deﬁ  nite length of time. . . . 
Marriage: 
It is desirable that engaged couples should not marry until the completion of two 
years from the date of arrival of the one who last reaches the ﬁ  eld, and the successful 
passing of both parties of such examinations in the language as are prescribed for that 
period by the ﬁ eld concerned.
—Missionary Department of the Assemblies of God, 
Missionary Manual (1931), 19–21.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[32] for the fi eld. Sparks fl  ew from those who held that consulting doctors was a denial 
of their belief in divine healing. One veteran missionary, Hilda Wagenknecht, simply 
refused to have a checkup. Confronted with her objection as well as her claim to good 
health, the Foreign Missions Committee swallowed hard and allowed her to return 
to India. But candidates who couldn’t pass the examination were simply advised to 
go home and “pray through” until healed. Appointment would then be forthcoming. 
The curious importance attached to a medical checkup in a denomination that 
stressed divine healing points to the pragmatism underlying Assemblies of God mis-
sions. Common sense dictated that little could be expected from a missionary in poor 
health. If medical treatment resolved the problem, they could resume their ministry. 
But if God healed them directly, so much the better—the doctrine still stood.
HARVESTING IN THE FIELDS OF THE LORD
213
Haven’t You Heard about Pearl Harbor?
I

[33] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
Perkin did not visit any of the mission fi elds until nine years after taking offi ce. Two 
reasons account for this: the department’s fi  nancial straits and Perkin’s commitment 
to administrative duties. By 1936, however, the fi  nancial picture had changed, and he 
made his fi  rst trip to Puerto Rico, Santo Domingo (present-day Dominican Republic), 
and Cuba. 
The membership of the Assemblies of God in the Foreign Missions Conference 
of North America brought many benefi  ts. At one of the gatherings, Perkin became 
friends with Emory Ross, a noted missionary and mission leader with the Disciples 
of Christ. Ross urged him to continue traveling abroad, both to encourage the mis-
sionaries and to gain a better understanding of their situations and problems. He 
accepted the advice, and by the time of his retirement in 1959, he had gone around 
the world three times and visited nearly every country in the world.

[34] accepted the advice, and by the time of his retirement in 1959, he had gone around 
the world three times and visited nearly every country in the world. 
During his thirty-two year tenure, Perkin became well known in the U.S. postal 
service because of the huge volume of mail he received from overseas. On one occa-
sion, a postcard arrived from Africa addressed only “Noel Perkin,  America.” 
ARTHUR E. WILSON 
(1892–1984)
While the saints back home were singing “When We All Get to Heaven” and “I’ll 
Fly Away,” Arthur Wilson and other Assemblies of God missionaries were hard at 
work in Africa laying the groundwork for a strong national church. Though it might 
appear that the folks back home thought only of the Second Coming, they shared the 
conviction with the missionaries that the second 
coming of Christ was at hand and believed that 
the mission fi  elds were ripe for the great end-
time harvest. As partners, missionaries and sup-
porting congregations knew that the task ahead

[35] coming of Christ was at hand and believed that 
the mission fi  elds were ripe for the great end-
time harvest. As partners, missionaries and sup-
porting congregations knew that the task ahead 
might take time and would not be easy. Mission-
aries, therefore, had to translate, teach believers 
to read, and train workers because, as Jesus said, 
“‘Night is coming, when no one can work’” (John 
9:4).
Wilson, a member of the fi  rst graduating 
class at Central Bible Institute, represented the 
new generation of missionaries (at least the 
majority) that had received spiritual formation 
in Bible institutes. In part, their student experi-
ence contributed to the long-term appeal of teamwork: Coming from many churches, 
Bible school students lived, studied, prayed, and ministered together. Their loyalties 
grew broader than to simply the home congregation. Indeed, as mission expenses 
increased over the years, the networking among graduates—many of them now pas-

[36] grew broader than to simply the home congregation. Indeed, as mission expenses 
increased over the years, the networking among graduates—many of them now pas-
tors—enabled missionaries to raise support more easily.
214
 Arthur E. Wilson and his second wife, Eliza-
beth. She had served as a missionary to the 
Philippines before they were married.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[37] When Arthur and Jennie Wilson arrived in Burkina Faso in 1926, they joined efforts 
with other pioneers already there. Plans were laid in 1928 for reducing the Mossi lan-
guage to writing and then for translating the New Testament, Sunday School lessons, 
doctrinal studies, and gospel songs. (Fellow missionaries John and Cuba Hall spear-
headed the translation of the entire Bible into More, the language of the Mossi peo-
ple. In his translation work, John personally typed the Bible six times.)
In the early 1930s, the Foreign Missions Department began publishing booklets 
that highlighted various mission fi  elds. Each described the country and its residents, 
as well as the work of the missionaries. Wilson wrote A Visit to Mos[s]iland (about 1932). 
In describing the people, he noted, “the Mos[s]ies are of negrotic stock. Mentally, 
they are not the equal of some other tribes, but they are not of such low mentality as

[38] In describing the people, he noted, “the Mos[s]ies are of negrotic stock. Mentally, 
they are not the equal of some other tribes, but they are not of such low mentality as 
some have supposed. They can be trained to a very satisfactory degree.” Unwittingly, 
Wilson had carried an American racial myth in his cultural baggage to Africa. Like 
other missionaries, he was a child of his time. Fortunately, as the years passed, such 
attitudes receded, due in part to changing racial attitudes in the United States and 
growing appreciation of cross-cultural differences.
At the same time, Wilson also recognized the insights of the Mossi culture and 
concurred with the saying, “‘The white man’s sense is in his books, but the black man’s 
sense is in his head.’” He agreed, saying, “I have met some old men who, though they 
knew nothing of books, yet they were fi  lled with wisdom.”
Wilson proved to be one of the best missionaries sent to Africa. His love for

[39] knew nothing of books, yet they were fi  lled with wisdom.”
Wilson proved to be one of the best missionaries sent to Africa. His love for 
the Mossi people grew over his many years of service. Unlike earlier missionaries 
who often had no strategy beyond tongues and prayer for the sick, he understood 
indigenous church principles. With other missionaries, he looked ahead to a self-sup-
porting, self-governing, and self-propagating national church. In his estimation, this 
necessitated a “trained native ministry,” one not dependent on American money. “The 
time has come,” he wrote, “to divorce the preaching of the gospel in foreign countries 
from home fi nances.”
The preparation of locals as Christian workers offered crucial advantages: “The 
natives know their own people as no white man will ever know them . . . , can endure 
hardships that would kill a white man,” and “are given more liberty to preach.” With

[40] natives know their own people as no white man will ever know them . . . , can endure 
hardships that would kill a white man,” and “are given more liberty to preach.” With 
proper training and mentoring, they could carry on in the event that the missionaries 
were forced to leave. In 2001, the Assemblies of God of Burkina Faso celebrated its 
eightieth anniversary with over 547,000 members and adherents in a nation of 12.5 
million people. Its impressive growth can be attributed to revival, mature leadership, 
and the combined “senses” of the black person and the white person.
RALPH D. WILLIAMS
(1902–1989)
Revisiting her native England, Alice E. Luce met Ralph and Richard Williams and 
became acquainted with their plans to study at Glad Tidings Bible Institute in San 
Francisco. Welshmen with a Methodist background, they had been converted and 
HARVESTING IN THE FIELDS OF THE LORD
215

[41] Francisco. Welshmen with a Methodist background, they had been converted and 
HARVESTING IN THE FIELDS OF THE LORD
215
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[42] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
baptized in the Spirit during a Pentecostal revival in 1919. They had dedicated their 
lives to Latin-American missions. The Williams brothers and Alice Luce became life-
long friends and, for a time, colleagues. 
Through Luce’s mentoring and their studies at Glad Tidings, the Williams broth-
ers became familiar with Roland Allen’s Missionary Methods: St. Paul’s or Ours? Not 
without controversy in some missions circles, Allen’s message challenged mission-
aries to follow Paul’s methods for church planting. In 1926 the brothers received 
missionary appointment and went to San Diego to assist Luce in her church and at 
Berean Bible Institute. 
When Richard and his wife left for Peru, Ralph and his wife, Jewyl, went to Mexico 
to work in a Bible institute. At the invitation of Salvadoran Pentecostals, they jour-
neyed to El Salvador in 1929. Having little money and only their luggage, they had no

[43] to work in a Bible institute. At the invitation of Salvadoran Pentecostals, they jour-
neyed to El Salvador in 1929. Having little money and only their luggage, they had no 
alternative but to live very close to the level of the people. Their diet consisted mostly 
of black beans, rice, and tortillas. For housing, they rented “some ‘almost bare rooms’ 
in town which they abandoned occasionally to scrimp on money.”
Visiting the churches with Francisco Arbizú, a Salvadoran evangelist and teacher, 
the Williamses were surprised at the worship they observed. With spontaneous 
expressions of tongues, testimonies, and praises, the services went on for hours. 
Congregations “seemed untiring, always ready to sing, to pray and to testify.” But the 
“mixture of zeal and ignorance” and erroneous teachings, which negatively affected 
the moral behavior of believers, deeply troubled Williams. Nevertheless, he respected

[44] “mixture of zeal and ignorance” and erroneous teachings, which negatively affected 
the moral behavior of believers, deeply troubled Williams. Nevertheless, he respected 
the freedom they felt in “praying aloud, praying in tongues, or [giving] spiritual utter-
ance in prophecy. And they were never hesitant about praying for the sick with genu-
ine expectation of being healed.”
Arbizú and Williams worked together to establish a doctrinal standard for the 
churches and arranged meetings for discussing the issues. Getting church represen-
tatives to cooperate was no easy task. But a constitution did win approval in 1930 
that placed the churches on an indigenous footing. A year later, Williams began a 
Bible institute and introduced, with Arbizú, the Reglamento Local, A Standard of Christian 
Doctrine and Practice. Those who sought church membership had to be knowledgeable 
of it as well as demonstrate a godly lifestyle. This worked so well in El Salvador that

[45] Doctrine and Practice. Those who sought church membership had to be knowledgeable 
of it as well as demonstrate a godly lifestyle. This worked so well in El Salvador that 
Assemblies of God churches in many Latin-American countries adopted it.
Williams’s contribution to foreign missions centered on his applying indigenous 
church principles and pioneering quality training for pastors and leaders. Bible insti-
tutes were made successful by at least three characteristics:  adaptability, a direct 
connection to evangelism and church planting, and a growing curriculum. Because 
national churches and missionaries had limited fi  nancial resources, adaptability was 
 essential to overcoming problems of geography, resources, and facilities. 
Years later, when teaching at a Bible school in Barquisimeto, Venezuela, Williams 
learned there were people who wanted to attend classes, but lived too far away. The 
 answer lay in starting night schools in Maracaibo and  Cabimas, a combined popula-

[46] learned there were people who wanted to attend classes, but lived too far away. The 
 answer lay in starting night schools in Maracaibo and  Cabimas, a combined popula-
tion center of over one million. All ten Assemblies of God churches in the area sent 
216
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[47] students to the two schools. Those without cars 
could walk to the schools. The school in Cabimas 
saved students a two-hour ride and payment of 
expensive tolls on a bridge six miles long. 
The sponsoring committee in Maraca-
ibo had resources to provide classrooms and 
equipment, but the one in Cabimas was not 
so fortunate. “There were no desks,” Wil-
liams reported. “Some used iron chairs 
purchased from an old theater. Also the 
church designated for the classes 
had no roof. There was, however, 
a lean-to-annex running down 
one side of the building which 
was to serve as the classroom. 
With the large number of students, this narrow annex proved to be too hot and stuffy, 
so we moved out into the roofl  ess auditorium. We now hold our classes under the 
starry sky, except for those nights when the rain chases us back under cover.”
Much to the surprise of Williams and his colleagues, when the schools opened,

[48] starry sky, except for those nights when the rain chases us back under cover.”
Much to the surprise of Williams and his colleagues, when the schools opened, 
forty-six students enrolled in Maracaibo and twenty-eight in Cabimas. The consecra-
tion of students and teachers and the ministry of God’s Word—not the facilities—led 
HARVESTING IN THE FIELDS OF THE LORD
217
Ralph D. Williams
Highway in the Sky
W
orld War II had hampered all missionary activities in most parts of the world. 
One of the more visible efforts to increase missionary effectiveness was to buy a 
trans-oceanic type airplane.
Following World War II, commercial ﬂ  ights were not readily available. The ﬁ  rst 
Ambassador was a modiﬁ  ed army surplus Highway in the Sky C-46. It had been con-
verted from a cargo plane and could hold 40 passengers. Later, realizing that four 
motors are better than two—especially when there is nothing below except the ocean—
the C-46 was sold, and a converted B-17 bomber was bought.

[49] motors are better than two—especially when there is nothing below except the ocean—
the C-46 was sold, and a converted B-17 bomber was bought.
Although the air service lasted only 3 years (1948–51), the two Ambassadors
brought prestige and glamour to the missionary efforts—or as George Carmichael 
described it, “The heavens have become a highway.”
Converting the C-46 cargo plane was no small task. The original surplus cost of 
$5,000 quickly jumped to an investment of $20,000. But still the Ambassador was con-
sidered a bargain because the plane had cost the government more than $200,000.
Paying for it was not so hard either. Assemblies of God youth caught the spirit of 
the project and helped pay for the Ambassador through Speed the Light projects.
—Wayne Warner, “Flying Ambassadors of Goodwill” 
Assemblies of God Heritage 5 (winter 1985–86): 3.

[50] the project and helped pay for the Ambassador through Speed the Light projects.
—Wayne Warner, “Flying Ambassadors of Goodwill” 
Assemblies of God Heritage 5 (winter 1985–86): 3.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[51] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
to the success of such institutions. Modest beginnings would eventually be super-
seded by improvements, as they trusted God. 
Like other Assemblies of God missionaries, Williams found that building an 
indigenous church meant training potential leaders. Upon arriving on the mission 
fi elds, missionaries quite naturally assumed they would continue to focus their 
energies on pulpit ministry. Much to their surprise, however, they found themselves 
behind lecterns much of the time, teaching classes in Bible institutes. Since 1922, 
when Assemblies of God missionaries founded their fi  rst overseas Bible institute in 
North China, the denomination has made enormous investments in personnel and 
monies for training national leaders. Indeed, it was far greater than Ralph Williams 
or anyone else could have imagined. Mission statistics for 2002 revealed 1,893 Bible 
schools and extension programs with over 90,534 students, supported by the General

[52] or anyone else could have imagined. Mission statistics for 2002 revealed 1,893 Bible 
schools and extension programs with over 90,534 students, supported by the General 
Council and its fraternally related constituencies worldwide.
JESSIE WENGLER
(1887–1958)
Women were indispensable to the growth of Assemblies of God missions, and 
for decades married and single women made up two-thirds of the missionary per-
sonnel. While often inaccurately stereotyped as simply workers in mission schools 
and orphanages, many, like Jessie Wengler and Marie Stephany, evangelized and 
taught prospective pastors. They served in the ranks of many other missionaries who 
pioneered on the “stony ground” of non-Christian countries. Along with those who 
labored in the Middle East, India, Sri Lanka, and Indonesia, 
they rejoiced in what appeared to others as “small harvests.” 
On her application for endorsement as a missionary, 
under “experience” Wengler had listed teaching music, work-

[53] they rejoiced in what appeared to others as “small harvests.” 
On her application for endorsement as a missionary, 
under “experience” Wengler had listed teaching music, work-
ing in the offi  ce of a Pentecostal publisher, participating in 
jail and hospital ministry, and handing out tracts. In addi-
tion, she had studied at a teacher training college in Col-
orado, Moody Bible Institute in Chicago, and Brooks Bible 
Institute in St. Louis. Without having been a pastor or evan-
gelist, she received appointment in 1919, but for whatever 
reason she waited thirty years for ordination. 
Pentecostal missionaries had worked in Japan since 1907. When Wengler arrived 
at the turn of 1920, she joined the Carl and John Juergensen families and others 
already there. In addition to evangelism, she later threw her energies into teaching at 
the Bible institute in Tokyo. 
Along with others who anticipated the soon return of Christ, she interpreted nat-

[54] the Bible institute in Tokyo. 
Along with others who anticipated the soon return of Christ, she interpreted nat-
ural calamities as divine judgments, prophetic “signs of the times” (Matthew 16:3). 
Through a revelation, Wengler declared that the devastating earthquake that hit Japan 
in 1923 signaled God’s wrath on the country. On the night of September 1, 1923, from 
her home in an outlying district, she saw the red horizon over Yokahoma and Tokyo, 
218
Jessie Wengler
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[55] which stretched for miles. “As I sat there in the dark with the Japanese people all 
around me,” she wrote, “I saw something in the clouds . . . , the form of a cherub; in 
the hand of the cherub was a vial, and he was pouring that vial upon the earth. That 
scripture which tells of the wrath of God being poured out on the earth came to my 
mind” (Revelation 16). At that moment, she didn’t know that hundreds of thousands 
were being burned to death because of fi  res sparked by the earthquake. 
“As I  looked,” she recounted to a wide-eyed gathering of believers at Central 
Assembly of God in Springfi  eld, Missouri, “this cherub seemed to change, and it was 
Jesus Himself. He was standing with His hands outstretched, and I cannot describe the 
awful agony on His face. It seemed as though He were pleading with the people. When 
I afterwards learned of the awfulness of that calamity, I knew that God had shown me

[56] awful agony on His face. It seemed as though He were pleading with the people. When 
I afterwards learned of the awfulness of that calamity, I knew that God had shown me 
that He was moving in the earth, and I believe that that  calamity was one of the signs of 
the time in which we are living. Of all the missionaries of the many denominations that 
were on the fi  eld, only one was killed. God protected His people at that time.”
Little did she realize that a greater holocaust was not much more than twenty 
years ahead and that she would experience it fi  rsthand. Before the United States 
would be engulfed in a world war for the second time, Noel Perkin notifi  ed the mis-
sionaries to return home at the department’s expense. The year was 1941. Unfortu-
nately, Wengler had been confi  ned to a hospital bed for several months. By the time 
she was well enough to be released, the Japanese navy had attacked Pearl Harbor

[57] nately, Wengler had been confi  ned to a hospital bed for several months. By the time 
she was well enough to be released, the Japanese navy had attacked Pearl Harbor 
and brought the United States into the confl ict. Even after her release, she remained 
partially paralyzed on her left side, and she was suffering from heart trouble so was 
unable to travel. Though she grew stronger in some respects, her health remained 
fragile throughout the war.
The Japanese authorities kept her under house arrest but allowed her to walk 
to the market when she needed to buy food. As conditions worsened, the govern-
ment rationed food and charcoal. The uncertainty of daily living severely tested her 
HARVESTING IN THE FIELDS OF THE LORD
219
Waiting for the Ambassador
I
 was superintendent for Gold Coast [present-day Ghana] when the Ambassadors were 
operating, and no one was happier than I was when the planes were sold. It was said 
that they ﬂ  ew “on a song and a gallon of gas.”

[58] operating, and no one was happier than I was when the planes were sold. It was said 
that they ﬂ  ew “on a song and a gallon of gas.”
I was responsible for booking ﬂ  ights in Africa, and they were always late. That 
meant entertaining missionaries for days while we waited for the plane.
Two days after we sent our boys home on the Ambassador, we received a telegram 
from Brother Perkin who asked if we had any news concerning the Ambassador. We 
learned that it had been sitting at Roberts Field in Liberia for 2 days!
I never rode the Ambassadors and wouldn’t for all the tea in China.
Eric M. Johnson
—“Letters from Our Readers,” 
Assemblies of God Heritage 5 (spring 1985–86): 15.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[59] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
faith, but she found comfort and strength in prayer. It was dangerous for Japanese 
Christians to be seen with an American; occasionally they sneaked food to Wengler 
at night. “Once a Japanese doctor sent me a big bag of bones,” she remembered. “The 
bones were full of marrow, so I made nourishing soup from them.” Yet because of the 
general food shortage, her weight dropped from a normal 124 pounds to just under 
90 pounds. When she had no food, she drank tea.
Unable to receive money from America, she asked the Swiss legation to inter-
vene for her with the Japanese government. It had confi  scated and sold two pieces of 
property she owned and kept the money. When the authorities reversed themselves 
and allowed her to draw monthly from the account, she considered it nothing short 
of a miracle. 
The bombing of Tokyo intensifi  ed in November 1944. Hundreds of American 
B-29s, B-24s, and P-51s fl  ew nightly sorties over Tokyo, dropping their loads of incen-

[60] of a miracle. 
The bombing of Tokyo intensifi  ed in November 1944. Hundreds of American 
B-29s, B-24s, and P-51s fl  ew nightly sorties over Tokyo, dropping their loads of incen-
diary bombs. During these months, the police moved her from suburb to suburb and 
fi nally housed her with fi  ve American Baptist missionaries who had also not been 
interned. One night, bombs rained around them and they fl  ed for their lives. Running 
through a wall of fi  re, they found refuge in a school compound. Frightful sounds of 
bombs coming through the air terrorized them: “You thought it was coming straight 
for you when actually it was falling some distance away.” She said, “I was not afraid 
to die, yet the screams of thousands of people burning to death and the sound of the 
raging fi  res was the most terrible thing I have ever heard.”
220
The Miracle Cow
I
n 1941, Robert and Mildred Tangen, mission-
aries to China, transferred to Baguio, Philip-

[61] raging fi  res was the most terrible thing I have ever heard.”
220
The Miracle Cow
I
n 1941, Robert and Mildred Tangen, mission-
aries to China, transferred to Baguio, Philip-
pines, to escape the impending war.  When the 
Japanese invaded the Philippines in December 
1941, the Tangens once again found them-
selves in “harm’s way.” Five hundred civilians, 
including the Tangens who were expecting 
their ﬁ  rst baby, were interned near Baguio. 
Forced to live in deplorable conditions and subjected to mental cruelty, they faced a 
starvation diet of wormy rice gruel.  Six months later, little “Bobby” Tangen was born. 
Although the internees repeatedly asked for milk for the babies and nursing mothers in 
the camp, their captors ignored the requests. As the situation worsened and Mildred’s 
milk began to dry up, a miracle happened.  A cow with a young calf suddenly appeared 
at the camp and stood by the fence. That cow faithfully supplied milk for the internees

[62] milk began to dry up, a miracle happened.  A cow with a young calf suddenly appeared 
at the camp and stood by the fence. That cow faithfully supplied milk for the internees 
until the day before their transfer to a prison in Manila where they were rescued by the 
American forces.
—Annette Newberry
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[63] Wengler’s relatively benevolent treatment by the Japanese contrasts sharply with 
that endured by missionaries held in internment camps. When the war ended, she 
continued her ministry and served as the Assemblies of God representative to the 
Allied Powers during the occupation of Japan. With other missionaries, she envi-
sioned the postwar period as “an unparalleled opportunity for the uplifting of the 
Christian faith, which makes it possible for the Church in Japan to rise up out of her 
despair and live anew in Christ.” Wengler was in Japan working toward that goal when 
she died at seventy-one.
MARIE STEPHANY
(1878–1963)
In the 1920s and 1930s, the government of Shansi province in North China strug-
gled with the rise of opium addiction and the climbing crime rate that came with it. To 
stamp out the problem, they fi rst prepared places for addicts to live in order to pro-
vide a positive atmosphere in which they could break the habit. Despite the provision

[64] stamp out the problem, they fi rst prepared places for addicts to live in order to pro-
vide a positive atmosphere in which they could break the habit. Despite the provision 
of food and kind treatment, they turned to opium again when they were released. In 
frustration, the authorities then ruled that every drug dealer 
should be beheaded; the warning had little effect. Finally, 
they decreed that all who sold opium, as well as those who 
smoked it, should be taken outside the gates of the cities and 
shot. Though hundreds of people were executed in this fash-
ion, the slavery of drug addiction increased. Into this context 
of suffering came thirty-eight-year-old Marie Stephany. 
Born in Hungary, Stephany and her family had immi-
grated to the United States and taken up residence in Cleve-
land, Ohio. From her early years, life had been diffi cult, often 
requiring hard work and long hours to support herself. After

[65] grated to the United States and taken up residence in Cleve-
land, Ohio. From her early years, life had been diffi cult, often 
requiring hard work and long hours to support herself. After 
conversion, she received Holy Spirit baptism at the Christian and Missionary Alliance 
church in Cleveland (later First Pentecostal Church) and felt called to China. She then 
went to Beulah Heights Bible and Missionary Training Institute to prepare for minis-
try. In 1916, Stephany received missionary ordination from the Assemblies of God and 
sailed for China. As with many other Pentecostals who traveled overseas in mission, 
she received formal missionary appointment after the fact, in her case three years later. 
Stephany made her home in Taiyuan, the capital of Shansi province, where she 
spent two years in language study. In 1919 she moved twenty-fi  ve miles outside the 
city to the village of Huei Ren with just two hundred dollars in her purse. There she

[66] spent two years in language study. In 1919 she moved twenty-fi  ve miles outside the 
city to the village of Huei Ren with just two hundred dollars in her purse. There she 
opened a chapel in a building located between a theater and a temple and began 
preaching the gospel. She later moved to Ta Ch’ang, where she continued her minis-
try. When the great famine of 1920 and 1921 devastated this region of China, she took 
children into her home to share her food with them.
Like other Pentecostals who believed in the priority of evangelism over charita-
ble endeavors, she found herself caught with the need to help the hurting. “I must tell 
HARVESTING IN THE FIELDS OF THE LORD
221
 Marie Stephany
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[67] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
you a little about my orphanage,” she wrote in a book entitled The Power of the Gospel 
in Shansi Province. “Although I am not called to this kind of work, I am praying that 
the Lord will defi  nitely call a missionary to take it upon her heart so that we may be 
able to take in more children.” Already assisted by Alice Stewart, the arrival of Henri-
etta Tieleman shortly after the book’s publication in 1934 must have seemed like an 
answer to prayer.
Stephany needed all the help she could get. Not only did she and her cowork-
ers administer an orphanage and conduct evangelistic meetings, but they also ran a 
Bible school and ministered to drug addicts. The strategy of training Chinese believ-
ers paid rich dividends in church planting. “Thank God, we have seen signs following 
the preaching of the gospel in China,” she reported. “The Lord has given the gift of 
healing to some of the native evangelists and pastors. A native pastor who has charge

[68] the preaching of the gospel in China,” she reported. “The Lord has given the gift of 
healing to some of the native evangelists and pastors. A native pastor who has charge 
of one of the outstations has prayed for hopeless cases, one a man who had been an 
invalid from rheumatism for fi  ve years. After he was prayed for he was able to get up 
and make his own living.” Stephany, Stewart, Tieleman, and other female missionar-
ies who taught in Bible institutes often proved to be effective mentors to young men 
training for the ministry, in some cases, more successful than male missionaries.
During Stephany’s twenty-six years in China, many people testifi  ed to being 
delivered from the “devil’s smoke” under her ministry. In some respects, her approach 
could be compared to an early kind of Teen Challenge ministry (an Assemblies of God 
program that began in the late 1950s). No one could deny the courageous achieve-

[69] could be compared to an early kind of Teen Challenge ministry (an Assemblies of God 
program that began in the late 1950s). No one could deny the courageous achieve-
ments of this woman—affectionately known as “Mother Peace”—who served in China 
during turbulent times.
222
 The “girls” at the beach, missionaries attending missionary conference on the 
Chinese coast: (l-r) Marie Stephany, Martina Kvamme, Alice Stewart, Palma 
Ramsborg, Irene Larsen, Ruth Melching, Helen Gustavson, Pansy Blossom
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[70] HARVESTING IN THE FIELDS OF THE LORD
223
Out of Revulsion, Love
A
fter the chanting ceased, the lamas 
welcomed us and asked us to be 
seated. A servant passed around a 
large bowl to each guest. I asked David, 
“What kind of soup is this?”
David replied, “‘It is Tibetan tea 
with yak butter. The hot drink will do 
you good!”
As the bowl of brown liquid was 
placed in my hands as a gesture of hos-
pitality and friendship, I noticed some 
hairs ﬂ  oating gracefully on top, along 
with a chunk of yak butter-and even a 
few lice. The rancid odor of the butter 
made me feel sick. I realized that I must 
drink; to refuse would seriously offend 
our hosts.
Desperately, I prayed two prayers: 
ﬁ rst, after blowing off some of the top 
layer that included the hairs and lice, 
I said, “Lord, thank You! Help me to 
accept their hospitality and to drink 
this stuff”; then, after gulping most of it 
down, “Lord,” I pleaded, “help me now to keep it down!”. . .

[71] I said, “Lord, thank You! Help me to 
accept their hospitality and to drink 
this stuff”; then, after gulping most of it 
down, “Lord,” I pleaded, “help me now to keep it down!”. . .
We took the path down the mountain to La-p’u to spend the night in the dirty inn. 
But I could not sleep. The Tibetans in this area appeared to me even more ﬁ  lthy than 
any of the Lisu I had met. A revulsion was rising up and growing stronger within me, 
undoing all the progress I had made in adjusting to the cultures. I felt myself drawing 
back, not wanting to mingle with these people any more. But how could I minister to 
the people when I felt I could never love them? Praying desperately, I cried, “Lord, help 
me!”
That night the Lord spoke to me in a dream. I saw a ﬁ  lthy individual standing before 
me, draped in an assortment of rags. I exclaimed, “This must be one of the ﬁ  lthiest 
persons I’ve ever seen!”
Then the Lord Jesus spoke softly, “Leonard, that is how you appeared in My sight.

[72] me, draped in an assortment of rags. I exclaimed, “This must be one of the ﬁ  lthiest 
persons I’ve ever seen!”
Then the Lord Jesus spoke softly, “Leonard, that is how you appeared in My sight. 
But I loved you when you were unlovely. I died on the cross for you. Before My precious 
blood was applied to you, you were just as unclean as any of these people who have 
never washed. But I loved you. Can you not love these less fortunate people for Me?”
Then I awoke. As I prayed, I experienced a baptism of love; His love was shed 
abroad in my heart by the Holy Spirit. From that time on my attitude changed com-
pletely. God gave me such a love for the Tibetans and the Lisu that I was able to eat with 
them, sit with them, sleep in their homes, and accompany them for days at a time. Out 
of my revulsion the Lord planted His love.
—Leonard Bolton, China Call (1984), 64, 66–67.

[73] them, sit with them, sleep in their homes, and accompany them for days at a time. Out 
of my revulsion the Lord planted His love.
—Leonard Bolton, China Call (1984), 64, 66–67.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[74] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
RECOMMENDED READING
Agar, Grace C. “Tibetan Border of Kansu Province.” 1940. Typewritten.
Carlow, Margaret. The King’s Daughter: Jessie Wengler. Springfi  eld, Mo.: Foreign Missions Depart-
ment, n.d.
Cavaness, Barbara. “God Calling: Women in Assemblies of God Missions.” Pneuma: The Journal 
of the Society for Pentecostal Studies 16 (spring 1994): 49–62.
Derr, Paul K. “The Zamzam’s Last Voyage: 4 A/G Missionaries Rescued After Germans Sink 
Ship in 1941.” Assemblies of God Heritage (fall 1987): 3–6.
Johnson, Elva. Through Deepest Waters: Oren Munger. Springfi  eld, Mo.: Foreign Missions Depart-
ment of the Assemblies of God, n.d.
Kitch, Paul L. “The Days in a Lifeboat.” Assemblies of God Heritage 5 (winter 1985–86): 8–10.
McGee, Gary B. This Gospel Shall Be Preached: A History and Theology of Assemblies of God Foreign Mis-
sions. Vols. 1 and 2. Springfi  eld, Mo.: Gospel Publishing House, 1986, 1989.

[75] McGee, Gary B. This Gospel Shall Be Preached: A History and Theology of Assemblies of God Foreign Mis-
sions. Vols. 1 and 2. Springfi  eld, Mo.: Gospel Publishing House, 1986, 1989.
Stephany, Marie. The Power of the Gospel in Shansi Province. Springfi  eld, Mo.: Foreign Missions 
Department of the Assemblies of God, ca. 1934. 
Warner, Wayne E. “1945 Philippine Liberation Creates Emotional Scenes.” Assemblies of God 
Heritage 5 (spring 1985): 6–11.
———. “The Dramatic 1945 Liberation at Los Banos, Philippines.” Assemblies of God Heritage 5 
(summer 1985): 7–8, 10–11, 16.
———. “Missionaries Caught in the Crossfi re.” Assemblies of God Heritage 11 (winter 1991–1992): 
4–7, 9, 26–27.
———. “An American Missionary in Nazi Hands.” Parts 1–3. Assemblies of God Heritage 11 (win-
ter 1991–1992): 10–11, 27; 12 (spring 1992): 3–5, 24; 12 (summer 1992): 24–27.
Wengler, Jessie. Letters From Japan. Pasadena, Calif.: By the author, 1955.

[76] ter 1991–1992): 10–11, 27; 12 (spring 1992): 3–5, 24; 12 (summer 1992): 24–27.
Wengler, Jessie. Letters From Japan. Pasadena, Calif.: By the author, 1955.
Williams, Ralph D. “Night Bible School for Venezuela,” Key 3 (1966): 11.
Wilson, Everett A. “Identity, Community, and Status: The Legacy of the Central American 
Pentecostal Pioneers.” In Earthen Vessels: American Evangelicals and Foreign Missions, 1880–1980. 
Grand Rapids: William B. Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1990.
Wood, George O. “Their Last Full Measure.” Enrichment Journal (fall 1999): 66–71.
Zongo, Etienne. “Bible College Lectures on the History of the Assemblies of God in Burkina 
Faso.” D. Min. diss., Assemblies of God Theological Seminary, 2003.
224
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[77] 225
P
ioneering churches in the decades of the 1930s and 1940s required the same 
faith, stamina, and commitment that earlier Pentecostals had needed. Next 
to a highway on the outskirts of Little Rock, Arkansas, in 1933, evangelist Roy 
Gilliam started a revival “under a tree, with nothing but his Bible and a determina-
tion to go on. Things looked very gloomy but he did not give up.” Within months 
an Assemblies of God church had been established. District Superintendent David 
Burris preached on “The Foundation of Pentecost” at the fi  rst anniversary of the new 
congregation. For the saints who gathered on that occasion, it all fi  t together: Pente-
cost, grace, and grit.
The Pentecostal tradition in evangelism continued to thrive 
in the Assemblies of God: “We had no publicity chairman,” 
remembered Walter Higgins about his tent campaigns. “Nor did 
we hire an agency to announce our meetings. Our publicity was 
the Power of God in action. When the Lord began to work, some-

[78] remembered Walter Higgins about his tent campaigns. “Nor did 
we hire an agency to announce our meetings. Our publicity was 
the Power of God in action. When the Lord began to work, some-
body would get the Baptism, or some vile sinner became con-
verted, or a miracle of healing would take place, then we would 
let out a shout, and the crowds would come to see what was 
taking place.”
Over the years, the benefi  ts of cooperative fellowship became 
more apparent. The scope of ministries also enlarged to encompass Jews, Hispanics, 
Native Americans, and other language groups, as well as those who were deaf and 
blind. In 1934, Nick and Arvilla Sivonen began working among Native Americans in 
Washington State, “visiting numerous reservations as well as ministering . . . along the 
highways and rivers.” In addition to preaching and teaching, they distributed clothing, 
bedding, and doing “what we can to win the confi  dence of the Indian people.” To pro-

[79] highways and rivers.” In addition to preaching and teaching, they distributed clothing, 
bedding, and doing “what we can to win the confi  dence of the Indian people.” To pro-
vide them with proper housing, Evangel readers were asked to send offerings for the 
purchase of a “good lightweight house trailer.” Cooperation took many forms.
The diversity of ministries, personalities, and creative methods enriched the 
growth of the Assemblies of God. This chapter investigates the endeavors of sev-
eral individuals in different parts of the country who impacted the denomination in 
CHAPTER 13 
COOPERATIVE 
FELLOWSHIP
Walter Higgins
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[80] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
various ways. Baptized in the Spirit at the Azusa Street revival, Ernest S. Williams 
became a leading pastor in the General Council and served as its general superin-
tendent. In the north-central part of the United States, Frank J. Lindquist shaped 
much of the early history of the Minnesota and outlying districts and founded North 
Central Bible Institute in Minneapolis. Little known to people outside Ohio and West 
Virginia, Elva K. Stump and a band of friends sacrifi  ced to pioneer churches.
From Texas to Colorado, Demetrio Bazán, Sr., pioneered Hispanic congregations 
and later became superintendent of the Latin American District Council. Two prom-
inent evangelists from drastically different backgrounds are introduced: Edith Mae 
Pennington, a one-time beauty queen, and Anna B. Lock, a former drunkard and drug 
addict. William J. Mitchell, a seaman and drunkard whose life was transformed at con-

[81] Pennington, a one-time beauty queen, and Anna B. Lock, a former drunkard and drug 
addict. William J. Mitchell, a seaman and drunkard whose life was transformed at con-
version, did much to encourage the Pentecostal movement in New England. 
ERNEST S. WILLIAMS
(1885–1981)
William J. Seymour, the well-known leader of the Azusa Street revival, doubted 
whether Ernest Williams was made of “ministerial timber”; at least that was Williams’s 
interpretation of the look he got from Seymour when he told Seymour he “felt called 
to the ministry.” Whether an accurate interpretation or merely projection (Williams 
described himself as a “timid soul”), Williams proved to be an enduring leader.
His parents were devout members of the First Holiness Church, a Wesleyan-ho-
liness congregation in San Bernardino, California. Williams was working on a ranch 
in Colorado when his mother sent word about the Azusa Street revival in progress.

[82] liness congregation in San Bernardino, California. Williams was working on a ranch 
in Colorado when his mother sent word about the Azusa Street revival in progress. 
After arriving there in October 1906, he was baptized in the Spirit and called to the 
ministry. 
226
First Native American Convention
H
istory was made when the First Indian Convention ever to be held in the Assem-
blies of God convened early in February on the San Carlos Reservation in Arizona. 
The ﬁ  ve-day session brought together a large group of Apache Indians and missionar-
ies who are working among various tribes. In addition to the staff of Arizona missionar-
ies, a delegation came from Washington and Idaho. 
The blessings and beneﬁ  ts of the meetings were beyond description as the work-
ers and Indian Christians fellowshiped together in prayer and worship. What a joy to 
the missionaries to see the large company of Indians, cleansed by the blood of Christ

[83] ers and Indian Christians fellowshiped together in prayer and worship. What a joy to 
the missionaries to see the large company of Indians, cleansed by the blood of Christ 
and anointed by the Holy Spirit! Testimonies with true ring were given by the Indians, 
as well as the missionaries, some telling of their salvation experience, some relating 
marvelous healings, still others witnessing to being baptized with the Holy Spirit. In the 
course of the meetings, God graciously spoke through the Indians with other tongues, 
and interpretations were given. . . .
—“Our Home Frontiers,” Pentecostal Evangel (April 10, 1948): 10–11.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[84] He traveled as an evangelist for several years before marrying Laura Jacobson. 
They moved east, pastoring churches in Ohio, New York, New Jersey, and fi  nally in 
Pennsylvania. His ministry at Philadelphia’s Highway Mission Tabernacle began in 
1920, and the congregation grew rapidly. Williams began out-
door services in parks and on streets, utilizing a “gospel car” 
for a traveling platform and pulpit for the meetings. He added 
jail and hospital ministries, and encouraged a strong youth 
program. The tabernacle also had a thirty-piece orchestra 
that played at church services and street meetings. Crowds 
at the church grew until they had to enlarge the former Pres-
byterian church where they met. Williams was generous to 
those in need. On one occasion his wife remarked, “I have to 
hide the table money, or he would give it away to any person 
approaching him with a fi nancial need.”
Recognition of his leadership led to his election as an executive presbyter of the

[85] hide the table money, or he would give it away to any person 
approaching him with a fi nancial need.”
Recognition of his leadership led to his election as an executive presbyter of the 
Eastern district and fi nally as general superintendent of the Assemblies of God in 
1929. After twenty years of service in this capacity, he announced he would not be a 
candidate for reelection. 
Williams and other leaders kept a close eye on the General Council’s fi  nancial 
operation. Funds were always tight, and every dollar had to be carefully spent. He 
was particularly concerned about his stewardship of the “Lord’s money.” As he trav-
eled by train across the United States to speak in churches, conventions, and district 
councils, he never paid the additional fee for a sleeping compartment when traveling 
overnight. He preferred to sleep sitting up in the coach in order to save money. When 
traveling through Europe with Noel Perkin, the missionary secretary, to visit mission-

[86] overnight. He preferred to sleep sitting up in the coach in order to save money. When 
traveling through Europe with Noel Perkin, the missionary secretary, to visit mission-
aries, Williams charged Perkin to spend as little as possible on their meals. Perkin, 
however, knowing that Williams did not understand the currency transactions, made 
certain that they had a full meal at least once every day. When Williams wondered 
if the meal appeared to be too expensive, Perkin could still assure him that he was 
being frugal.
Momentous changes took place during his long administration. The lists of min-
isters, church members, and congregations more than tripled. New departments 
and programs emerged: national Christ’s Ambassadors (CA) Department, Speed the 
Light, national Sunday School Department, and Boys and Girls Missionary Crusade 
(BGMC). He also encouraged the development of the Radio Department and became

[87] Light, national Sunday School Department, and Boys and Girls Missionary Crusade 
(BGMC). He also encouraged the development of the Radio Department and became 
the speaker on the program Sermons in Song, fi  rst aired in 1946. The Assemblies of God 
entered the National Association of Evangelicals (1942), Pentecostal World Confer-
ence (1947), and the Pentecostal Fellowship of North America (1948). He played key 
roles in the founding of the last two organizations.
Over the years, Williams wrote extensively on doctrinal and devotional subjects. 
Many of his articles appeared in the Pentecostal Evangel, which also included his pop-
ular “Questions and Answers” column (a service to readers that had originated with 
COOPERATIVE FELLOWSHIP
227
 Ernest S. Williams
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[88] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
E. N. Bell). While remaining a popular speaker around the country after his retire-
ment, he taught for several years at Central Bible Institute (present-day Central Bible 
College). His classroom theology notes took form in his three-volume Systematic The-
ology, published in 1953.
This text added signifi  cantly to the doctrine books already printed by Gospel 
Publishing House, notably Peter Nelson’s Bible Doctrines (1934) and Myer Pearlman’s 
more extensive Knowing the Doctrines of the Bible (1937). Each one presented Pentecostal 
doctrine within the theological tradition of evangelicalism.
Thomas F. Zimmerman, an associate of Williams and later general superinten-
dent, commented that “it was characteristic of Brother Williams, that whenever a new 
situation presented itself, he would rise to the challenge and put his whole effort into 
the work.”
FRANK J. LINDQUIST
(1898–1989)
“The test of a leader is not what he can do himself, but what he can inspire other

[89] the work.”
FRANK J. LINDQUIST
(1898–1989)
“The test of a leader is not what he can do himself, but what he can inspire other 
men to do.” It was a motto Frank J. Lindquist lived by, and his achievements refl ected 
it. Raised in a predominantly Swedish-American community near Pittsburgh, Penn-
sylvania, the family held membership in the Evangelical Free Church. When Pente-
costal evangelists came to hold meetings in the community, the entire family and 
228
The Saints Declare
“Many a four-star general in God’s army, in the eyes of the saints down here, will 
leave the Judgment Seat of Christ as a ‘buck private’; and many a ‘buck private,’ in the 
eyes of the saints down here, will be revealed as a four-star general at the Judgment 
Seat of Christ. Man looketh on the outward appearance, but God looketh on the heart.”
—H. B. Kelchner, evangelist
“When preaching [Smith Wigglesworth] became entangled in long, involved sen-

[90] Seat of Christ. Man looketh on the outward appearance, but God looketh on the heart.”
—H. B. Kelchner, evangelist
“When preaching [Smith Wigglesworth] became entangled in long, involved sen-
tences. Then he would relieve our perplexity by speaking angelically in tongues which 
he always interpreted himself. It was all part of the sermon. Explain it how you will, 
there were some remarkable ﬂ  ashes of revelation.”
—Donald Gee, British Pentecostal leader
“At the present time the dictator of Italy [Benito Mussolini] is the head of ‘the con-
federation of the west’ [Daniel 7:23-25]. Whether or not he is the anti-Christ will never 
be known until the Holy Spirit, the great restrainer, is taken out of the world and the 
identity of the man of sin is ﬁ  nally revealed [2 Thessalonians 2:6-10].”
—Charles S. Price, evangelist and author of Mussolini: Is He the Anti-Christ?
“I know a lot of men preached that Mussolini was the anti-Christ. I wonder what 
those poor fellows are preaching now.”

[91] —Charles S. Price, evangelist and author of Mussolini: Is He the Anti-Christ?
“I know a lot of men preached that Mussolini was the anti-Christ. I wonder what 
those poor fellows are preaching now.”
—Jack Coe, evangelist
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[92] about thirty others from the congregation were baptized in the 
Spirit. Forced to leave their church, they rented an auditorium 
and began to hold Pentecostal services.
Inspired by the ministry of evangelist Ben Hardin, Lindquist 
and close friend James Menzie joined him in 1920 in conducting 
a tent revival in Gary, Indiana. A year later, the two young men set 
out for Minnesota, having been told by Hardin that it was one of 
the neediest areas for the gospel. Taking their tent from town to 
town, they planted new churches as they went. Their successes in 
evangelism, combined with those of others, led to the forming of 
the North Central district in 1922. Both received ordination at the inaugural meeting. 
The district encompassed fi  ve states: Wisconsin, Minnesota, (eastern) Montana, and 
North and South Dakota. When the fi  rst superintendent, C. M. Hanson, left offi ce a 
year later, Lindquist became the second and held the position for twenty-two years.

[93] North and South Dakota. When the fi  rst superintendent, C. M. Hanson, left offi ce a 
year later, Lindquist became the second and held the position for twenty-two years. 
But his longevity was not inspired by the perks. Like other district offi  cials of the 
time, he pastored a church, Minneapolis Gospel Tabernacle (1924–1967), due to the 
fi  nancial limitations of the district.
To the hats of pastor and district offi  cer, he added that of president in 1930, 
founding North Central Bible Institute (now North Central University) in the church 
basement. Seven years later they purchased the Asbury Hospital in downtown Min-
neapolis. Valued at $469,000, it was purchased for $125,000 during the Depression. 
Evangelist Watson Argue, Sr., visiting the school, observed: “It has been [my] privi-
lege to visit many Bible school buildings, but none has impressed [me] more than 
this: . . . spacious classrooms, reception rooms, libraries, offi  ces, dormitory rooms, an

[94] lege to visit many Bible school buildings, but none has impressed [me] more than 
this: . . . spacious classrooms, reception rooms, libraries, offi  ces, dormitory rooms, an 
elevator, and quarters for the Northern Gospel Publishing House.”
Although lacking formal ministerial training, Lindquist strongly supported it. 
But refl  ecting the long-standing tension between reliance on education and divine 
empowerment in one’s ministry, he told the students: “You’ve got to have more than 
a degree to go into the ministry. You’ve got to have an anointing. You’ve got to have 
a call of God. You must experience the anointing of the Holy Spirit in public, private, 
and family life.” 
No account of Frank Lindquist would be complete, however, without mention of 
his wife. Irene Gunhus had been converted and baptized in the Spirit during a Charles 
S. Price crusade at the Skating Arena in Minneapolis, an event that boosted atten-

[95] his wife. Irene Gunhus had been converted and baptized in the Spirit during a Charles 
S. Price crusade at the Skating Arena in Minneapolis, an event that boosted atten-
dance at the Gospel Tabernacle. Joining the congregation, she met Lindquist, and 
they were married in 1928. Irene was a major contributor to her husband’s ministry 
and took an active role in pastoring the church. 
ELVA K. STUMP
(1885–1985)
“Sister Stump” died at one hundred years of age in 1985, and her name appeared 
in an obituary list of ministers in the Pentecostal Evangel. But few in the General Council 
COOPERATIVE FELLOWSHIP
229
Frank J. Lindquist
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[96] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
recognized her name, and of those who did, probably most of them knew little of her 
remarkable ministry in Ohio and West Virginia. Like the vast majority of workers in 
the Lord’s vineyard, she died in relative obscurity. 
She was born Elva Klingler in Somerset, Ohio. Moving to 
the neighboring state of Pennsylvania, she enrolled in a nursing 
program at an Episcopal hospital in Philadelphia. She and her 
husband, Thomas, were members of the (“Dunkard”) Brethren 
Church. Although he never became a Pentecostal, after Elva was 
baptized in the Spirit he supported her call to the ministry. For 
this—not having his wife “in subjection” according to 1 Timothy 
2:11–12—the Brethren excommunicated him. 
During her pastorate of the Maple Avenue Mission in Canton, 
Ohio, in 1928, she testifi  ed to being healed one evening. She had 
been diagnosed with a terminal spinal infection and had taken to bed in an upstairs

[97] Ohio, in 1928, she testifi  ed to being healed one evening. She had 
been diagnosed with a terminal spinal infection and had taken to bed in an upstairs 
room of the home of friends. While downstairs they mourned that she wouldn’t make 
it through the night, Stump got out of bed and began to walk. “When they saw and 
heard [me and the nurse] walking and shouting and praising the Lord,” she wrote, 
“I guess it was something like the lame man at the gate who was healed. . . . The tele-
phone was kept busy that evening, witnessing and testifying. Many people came in, 
even until midnight, and joined us in our praises.”
In the midst of other responsibilities, Elva and Thomas found time to adopt and 
raise thirteen children. The number jumped from six to thirteen when the children’s 
home they directed near Canton closed. Because the last seven children could not be 
placed, the Stumps made them part of their family.

[98] home they directed near Canton closed. Because the last seven children could not be 
placed, the Stumps made them part of their family.
Elva Stump and a “Sister Coltharp” felt led of the Spirit on August 12, 1937, to 
plant a church in Shadybrook, a village on the outskirts of Weston in the mountains of 
West Virginia. Although the community had a public school, it had no church. Appar-
ently no one had been successful in establishing one there. Renting an unfi  nished 
second fl  oor area above a garage, they worked hard to get it ready for services. Eight 
days later, they began a Vacation Bible School and discovered that the children who 
came had little or no Christian training. At the fi  rst announced church service, seven-
teen people went to the altar for salvation. “The place was very crude,” Stump wrote 
to supporters, “but people came because a crucifi  ed risen savior was preached.”
As the weather turned colder in the autumn, they found larger and better quar-

[99] to supporters, “but people came because a crucifi  ed risen savior was preached.”
As the weather turned colder in the autumn, they found larger and better quar-
ters for the congregation. Except for time off at Christmas, the two women and visit-
ing preachers held evangelistic meetings every night (Tuesday to Sunday) for months 
at a time. Stump wrote that at the Shadybrook Gospel Mission of Weston, “we are 
holding up a high standard and people are cleaning up from their fi  lthy habits and 
being transformed by the power of God. Eight confessed to the use of tobacco and 
asked for prayer to be delivered. God answered prayer, delivered and fi  lled some of 
them with the Holy Ghost.” Before she resigned the church years later, it had grown 
to two hundred believers.
230
Elva K. Stump
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[100] Among others, she and “the Elliott Sisters, Bro. & Sis. Stewart, Bro. & Sis. Allison, 
Bro. Kirkpatrick, Bro. & Sis. Hart, Bro. & Sis. Berquist and Sis. Coltharp” made up the 
“Pioneer Mission Workers of West Virginia.” This loose-knit association worked within 
the Assemblies of God to evangelize the region. It is not known if all of them had 
ministerial credentials; Stump, however, had been ordained in (what was then) the 
Central District Council in 1934 at age forty-eight. 
Without formal fi  nancial backing from churches, they went to unchurched areas, 
holding “tent meetings, camp meetings, street meetings, jail services and opening 
new fi  elds.” In 1939 she reported, “We know what it is for the larder to be empty and 
[to] boil the potatoes and turnip peelings for soup and live on skimmed milk for 
three days, [to] not even have money to buy a postage stamp.” Finding an abandoned 
church, schoolhouse, or hall, they would begin holding revival meetings and Vacation

[101] three days, [to] not even have money to buy a postage stamp.” Finding an abandoned 
church, schoolhouse, or hall, they would begin holding revival meetings and Vacation 
Bible Schools. 
To train workers, they started their own Bible school. Still, more were needed: 
“Our greatest need is laborers, I say ‘sweaters,’ who are not afraid of the ‘summer’s 
noonday sun,’” she wrote. “Yes, there are opportunities on every hand. Calls come but 
COOPERATIVE FELLOWSHIP
231
Deutscher Zweig der Assemblies of God
T
he German Branch of the Assemblies of God (renamed German district in 1973) was 
formed in 1922 to meet the needs of German-speaking Pentecostals in the U.S. 
Hugo A. Ulrich, at the urging of E. N. Bell, invited fellow German-speaking pastors to 
New Castle, Pennsylvania, in November 1922 for the purpose of organizing the Ger-
man Branch. Seven of the sixteen participants hailed from Michigan; others were from

[102] New Castle, Pennsylvania, in November 1922 for the purpose of organizing the Ger-
man Branch. Seven of the sixteen participants hailed from Michigan; others were from 
Illinois, New Jersey, New York, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Wisconsin, and Canada. The scat-
tered German-speaking congregations overcame their isolation and worked together 
to effectively minister in their native tongue. 
By the 1930s, churches were added in California, Nebraska, North Dakota, South 
Dakota, and Washington. The German Branch and the Russian and Eastern European 
Mission (R.E.E.M.) jointly published Wort und Zeugnis (Word and Witness). The Ger-
man Branch began publishing a Sunday School quarterly in 1932. After the Assem-
blies of God and R.E.E.M. parted ways in 1940, the German Branch began publishing 
Licht und Leben (Light and Life) in 1942. Annual camp meetings were held in various 
churches and camps (including at Lake Odessa, Michigan) until the German Branch

[103] Licht und Leben (Light and Life) in 1942. Annual camp meetings were held in various 
churches and camps (including at Lake Odessa, Michigan) until the German Branch 
established Bethel Camp at Bridgman, Michigan, in 1944. The German Branch began 
sending missionaries in the 1930s, resulting in outreaches in Yugoslavia, Poland, India, 
Mexico, and a substantial work in Brazil. German Pentecostals in the U.S. and Canada 
maintained close fellowship. 
Like other immigrants, many German-speaking Pentecostals clung tenaciously to 
their culture and language. 
Over time, many German churches were Americanized and transferred to 
English-language districts. By the late 1970s, most German district churches had made 
the controversial choice to switch to English-language services.
—Darrin J. Rodgers
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[104] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
no one to go and [it’s] better not go than see souls born into the kingdom and left by 
the wayside to perish because there is no faithful pastor.”
Asked to explain why she could send only an offering of one dollar to head-
quarters for the renewal of her credentials in 1939, Stump assured the brethren in 
Springfi eld that she had not “spent money on fi  ne automobiles, pianos, fi ne clothes, 
[perms], jewelry and many other things that I  see in our Pentecostal ranks.” Then 
bringing the Word to bear on herself, and expressing the matter-of-fact pluck of a 
Pentecostal pioneer, she concluded: “But I hear Jesus say, ‘What is that to thee, follow 
thou me’ [John 21:22]. So I turn my eyes to Him and He supplies.”
DEMETRIO BAZÁN, SR. 
(1900–1976)
Demetrio Bazán was so admired by some Hispanic pastors that in addition to 
imitating his mannerisms and preaching, many began wearing crew cuts just like his.

[105] DEMETRIO BAZÁN, SR. 
(1900–1976)
Demetrio Bazán was so admired by some Hispanic pastors that in addition to 
imitating his mannerisms and preaching, many began wearing crew cuts just like his. 
Bazán’s legacy, however, rests on a stronger foundation than hero worship. Pastors 
respected him, for they knew that he shared their struggles. 
Born in Mexico in 1900, he was adopted 
at age nine by a well-to-do family who had 
no children of their own. This insured that 
he would receive an education. When the 
family later moved to Kingsville, Texas, he 
was converted under the ministry of Henry 
C. Ball, who discipled him in the faith. He 
married Manuelita (Nellie) Treviño in 1920, 
and both received ordination from the 
Assemblies of God. Afterward, they went to 
El Paso to work with Francisco Olazábal. 
Two years later, Bazán joined Olazábal and others in withdrawing from the 
Assemblies of God to form a competing organization. They had become frustrated

[106] El Paso to work with Francisco Olazábal. 
Two years later, Bazán joined Olazábal and others in withdrawing from the 
Assemblies of God to form a competing organization. They had become frustrated 
with the decision of the General Council’s leadership to delay the establishment of a 
Latin American district with Hispanic leaders. At a time when U.S. relations with Mex-
ico were severely strained due to recent American military intervention in Mexican 
affairs, emotions ran high. Ball, the leader of the “Mexican convention” of the Texico 
district, had to break the bad news of the delay; this triggered the separation. The 
Hispanics who remained (likely out of esteem for Ball) waited until 1939 before one 
of them took offi  ce as district superintendent of the Latin American district.
Bazán’s departure was brief, however, and he reaffi  liated a year later. After return-
ing, he pastored churches in Kingsville, Houston, and Denver, Colorado. When called

[107] Bazán’s departure was brief, however, and he reaffi  liated a year later. After return-
ing, he pastored churches in Kingsville, Houston, and Denver, Colorado. When called 
to pastor in Denver, he lacked any promise of funds for food and clothing. Further-
more, he didn’t know where his large family of nine would stay once they arrived. 
They went with only the address of someone living in Denver who knew a member of 
their former congregation in San Antonio. Upon arriving, they met José Arroyo, who 
232
 Manuelita and Demetrio Bazán
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[108] immediately told them, “I have the house for you to live in.” He told them that he had 
been led by a dream to contact the owner of a certain house. With his consent, the 
Bazáns set up housekeeping. 
The honor of being the fi  rst Hispanic superintendent of the Latin American 
district fell to Bazán himself in 1939. His contributions to the district included its 
restructuring, recommending the formation of the Spanish Eastern district (originally 
with Puerto Rico), and training. Many pastors received their only formal instruction in 
Scripture and doctrine from the ministers’ institutes he conducted in various places. 
Bazán’s concern for the welfare of the ministers and their families led him to have the 
new Social Security Act (1935) translated into Spanish in order for them to enroll and 
understand the benefi ts.
EDITH MAE PENNINGTON
(1902–1974)
Voted “Most Beautiful Girl in the U.S.” by the judges in a national competition

[109] understand the benefi ts.
EDITH MAE PENNINGTON
(1902–1974)
Voted “Most Beautiful Girl in the U.S.” by the judges in a national competition 
in 1921, Edith Mae Patterson became a celebrity overnight. This award transformed 
the young schoolteacher from Pine Bluff, Arkansas, into a beauty queen and led her 
to Hollywood for a promising career in motion pictures. It was the Roaring Twenties 
COOPERATIVE FELLOWSHIP
233
My Trip to the Holy Land
T
hey called for everybody [on the ship] to register. You were to register what State 
you were from, your occupation, your business on this trip, and so forth. I registered 
as a “Pente costal evangelist,” and the purser on the boat said, “A—a what?” I told him. 
He said, “What does that stand for?” “We’re Full Gospel folks,” I replied. He said, “What 
do you mean by ‘Full Gospel folks’?” I said, “We believe in salvation holiness, the soon 
coming of the Lord, Divine healing, and the baptism in the Holy Ghost.” Every body was

[110] do you mean by ‘Full Gospel folks’?” I said, “We believe in salvation holiness, the soon 
coming of the Lord, Divine healing, and the baptism in the Holy Ghost.” Every body was 
listening, but nothing stayed with them except the words, “divine healing.” After we 
had registered I went back up [on deck]. Pretty soon they had to lead me to my room. 
I was deathly sick. I was in my room for about two hours with my ﬁ  rst hard seasickness. 
It makes you so sick that you do not want to see anybody. There came a knock at the 
door. Mr. Graham said, “Mrs. Taylor, my wife is awfully sick. Didn’t you say you believe 
in divine healing?” I said, “Yes sir.” 
He said, “Will you come and pray for her?”
I thought if it were anything else but seasickness! I tried to look pleasant; I did not 
want her to see I was seasick. I went in, and without an introduction said, “O God, touch 
her! Heal her.” My eyes began to draw shut, and something caused me to get up. I said,

[111] want her to see I was seasick. I went in, and without an introduction said, “O God, touch 
her! Heal her.” My eyes began to draw shut, and something caused me to get up. I said, 
“I’ll be back.” I went back to my room—and for about three and a half hours in came 
the sick calls! And the devil said, “Physician, heal thyself. Why don’t you do something 
for yourself?” I said, “I’m too sick to pray for myself. The reason I prayed for the other 
folks was because I had to!”
—Evangelist Emma Taylor, “My Trip to the Holy Land,” 
Pentecostal Evangel (July 11, 1936): 8–9.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[112] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
in America, and the dazzling lights of Hollywood enticed many young women, who 
would have given anything for the opportunity handed Edith. 
Although she enjoyed the limelight for a time, she became disillusioned with 
the glitzy lifestyle and the lack of moral values in what she came to see as a modern 
Sodom. “What is wrong with me?” she asked her mother. “Most young girls would 
be thrilled with all these honors and publicity, to have their names in electric lights, 
newspaper write-ups, et cetera. Mother, why am I not happy?” Finding only empti-
ness, she began to read her Bible and fi  nally severed her contact with Hollywood. 
Sometime after, she knelt at an old-fashioned altar in a Pentecostal church in Okla-
homa City and surrendered her life to Christ: “The Light from the Cross exceeded 
the bright lights of the stage. I exchanged the glamour of the world for the glory of 
the Cross. I pledged my irrevocable word 
to Christ to forsake all and follow Him.”

[113] the bright lights of the stage. I exchanged the glamour of the world for the glory of 
the Cross. I pledged my irrevocable word 
to Christ to forsake all and follow Him.” 
The turnabout brought an end to her 
marriage with her business manager, J. 
B. Pennington, who wanted nothing to 
do with her faith. 
Later baptized in the Spirit, she 
heard the call to preach and received 
ordination from the Arkansas-Louisi-
ana district in 1930. For the next twenty 
years, Pennington became a highly suc-
cessful evangelist and then pastor in Shreveport, Louisiana. Her celebrity status and 
decision to forsake the lights of Hollywood for ministry on the sawdust trail captured 
the interest of newspapers across the country, which retold her story and highlighted 
her meetings. Reporters eagerly sought for interviews and pictures. 
Another aspect of Pennington’s fame came from her calling as a female 
preacher. Although the General Council had earlier given credentials to women as

[114] Another aspect of Pennington’s fame came from her calling as a female 
preacher. Although the General Council had earlier given credentials to women as 
evangelists and missionaries, ordination as pastors didn’t come until 1935. Many 
questioned the place of females in the pulpit, except when a male minister was 
not available. This artifi  cial difference couldn’t last, for too many women had been 
active in ministry from the beginning of the Assemblies of God, and few could deny 
the fruit of their labors. In regard to the outpouring of the Spirit on men and women 
(Acts 2:16–18), she demanded: “If God calls a woman to preach the gospel, and His 
blessings are upon her, ‘in confi  rming His Word with signs following,’ whose right is 
it to question her right to preach the gospel, pastor a church, or lead a movement 
under God?”
ANNA B. LOCK
(1890–1952)
“Now I  lay me down to sleep, I  pray the Lord my soul to keep” was the only

[115] it to question her right to preach the gospel, pastor a church, or lead a movement 
under God?”
ANNA B. LOCK
(1890–1952)
“Now I  lay me down to sleep, I  pray the Lord my soul to keep” was the only 
prayer that Anna B. Lock could remember. Trapped in a sinful lifestyle and chemically 
234
Advertisement for services with  Edith Mae Pennington 
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[116] addicted, she recited this in moments of great loneliness and despair; there were 
many such times. She knew that Jesus had died on the cross, but didn’t know how to 
get saved. No one ever invited her to church—good and upstanding people would 
have fl  inched at the sight of her entering their church.
Like other children growing up in the home of an alcoholic parent, she had more 
than one strike against her. When her father brought his buddies home and mixed 
drinks for them, he gave Anna whiskey to drink 
when she asked for it. She was only seven or eight 
years old. 
Her mother took the children to Sunday 
School, but had to endure the curses of her hus-
band. Added to other abuses, she fi  nally left the 
faith and moved to another town to rear her chil-
dren in safety. Unfortunately, it was too late for 
Anna. At fourteen years, she had already become 
an alcoholic and left home. Two years later, she 
gave birth to a baby girl out of wedlock and left her

[117] Anna. At fourteen years, she had already become 
an alcoholic and left home. Two years later, she 
gave birth to a baby girl out of wedlock and left her 
in the care of family members. Anna was in the fast 
lane to a dead end—skid row.
Never able to keep a job, Lock drifted to Los 
Angeles and then to San Francisco. While in Califor-
nia, she nearly died several times from her drinking 
and drug overdoses. By the time she came into con-
tact with the Salvation Army, her weight had dropped from 163 pounds to 107 pounds. 
The Army helped arrange for her return home to Illinois. At long last, she was reunited 
with her daughter, mother, and older sister. For a time, she managed to keep away from 
liquor and drugs. During this time, she married and promised her husband that she 
would remain off drugs. Her drinking, however, resumed. “I made home brew by 20-gal-
lon lots and drank it the same way,” she wrote. “My husband furnished a lovely home

[118] would remain off drugs. Her drinking, however, resumed. “I made home brew by 20-gal-
lon lots and drank it the same way,” she wrote. “My husband furnished a lovely home 
for me but I didn’t take care of it. All I wanted was drink and cigarettes.”
When her aunt arrived for a visit in 1931, she encouraged Lock to attend a revival 
at a local Pentecostal church. Finding herself strangely drawn to the meetings, she 
attended almost nightly for two weeks. One night, sinners were invited to the altar 
while the congregation sang:
I’ve wandered far away from God,
 Now I’m coming home.
The paths of sin too long I’ve trod,
 Lord, I’m coming home.
Approaching her, one of the preachers put her arm around Lock and said, “Jesus 
loves you. He needs you.” 
COOPERATIVE FELLOWSHIP
235
 Anna B. Lock
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[119] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
Moments later Lock went to the altar and wept in repentance. “O God, I’ve been 
so wicked and low,” she prayed. “Could You do anything with a wreck like me? Here 
I am, Lord. If You’ll forgive me, I’ll live the rest of my life for You.”
Then began a remarkable change in her life: She led her family to the Lord, and 
two years after her conversion, she began pioneering a church there in Galva, Illinois. 
It began meeting in the basement of the post offi  ce, and within six years grew to a 
congregation of eighty people. Understanding the needs of the poor during these 
Depression years, she organized a sewing circle to make clothes. The services at the 
Galva Assembly were marked by preaching, “shouting, singing, and dancing in the 
Spirit.” At the annual Illinois district camp meetings, “[Lock] could always be seen on 
the platform with her tambourine and usually led at least one ‘Jericho March’ during 
the meetings.”

[120] Spirit.” At the annual Illinois district camp meetings, “[Lock] could always be seen on 
the platform with her tambourine and usually led at least one ‘Jericho March’ during 
the meetings.”
In the late l930s, she felt led to become an itinerant evangelist and journeyed 
across North America holding services and sharing her testimony. Even with only a 
third-grade education and no formal ministerial training, her campaigns led to many 
conversions and Spirit baptisms. In addition, she frequently went to Chicago’s skid 
row to evangelize on the streets and in the bars. “It takes no more of His precious 
blood to cleanse a poor, drunken, cigarette-smoking, dope-using sinner,” she wrote, 
“than it does the haughty, high-minded, stiff-necked church member who has a form 
of godliness, but denies the power thereof.” 
Her own dramatic conversion provided her with a special understanding of the 
transforming power of God’s love: “[Jesus] lifted me from the underworld and pre-

[121] Her own dramatic conversion provided her with a special understanding of the 
transforming power of God’s love: “[Jesus] lifted me from the underworld and pre-
pared me for the upperworld.” Often Lock would begin the process for her converts in 
a similar fashion, removing them from skid row and taking them home to live with her 
family until they were able to stand on their own feet as Christians.
236
I Listened to Myself Preach
I
n 1922, I was in my ﬁ  rst pastorate at Puxico, Missouri, which is in the southeastern 
part of the state. I was a real novice in the ministry, pastoring a small congregation in 
a town of only 700.
Evangelist Maria B. Woodworth-Etter was at that time closing out an outstanding 
ministry. I had read a lot about her but had never been in one of her meetings. When 
I heard that she would be conducting services in Sikeston, I told one of the women in 
the church that I would like to attend a service and hear Sister Etter preach.

[122] I heard that she would be conducting services in Sikeston, I told one of the women in 
the church that I would like to attend a service and hear Sister Etter preach.
I didn’t have a car at that time, but the woman in the church told me her sister had 
a car and would be happy to take us.
When we walked into the open-air meeting at Sikeston, we looked at the biggest 
church crowd we had ever seen. I thought it looked like 10,000 people, but it was prob-
ably more like a thousand.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[123] COOPERATIVE FELLOWSHIP
237
Before the service started, several people on the platform 
were talking with Sister Etter. We learned later that the song 
leader’s mother had died so he had gone to the funeral. They 
were looking for a song leader.
Soon a woman on the platform walked into the audience and 
came straight toward my wife and me. We then discovered 
that we knew the woman.
She said, “Brother Aaron, Mrs. Etter wants 
you to come to the platform.”
But I didn’t think I belonged on the platform. The 
woman insisted, so I went. After I met Sister Etter, they 
asked me to lead the singing. I answered that I had never 
led a song service for such a big congregation. I hadn’t 
been preaching very long, and the crowds at Puxico were 
very small compared to this one.
Mrs. Etter answered my objection. “You’ll do all right. 
The Lord will help you.”
With fear and trembling I accepted the responsibility 
and talked with Sister Etter about the type of songs 
she wanted.

[124] The Lord will help you.”
With fear and trembling I accepted the responsibility 
and talked with Sister Etter about the type of songs 
she wanted.
After I had led a verse of the ﬁ  rst song and was into the second verse, I felt a light 
tap on my shoulder. It was Mrs. Etter. She said, “Brother, the Lord would have you 
preach here tonight.”
I was stunned. I had reluctantly accepted the invitation to lead the song service. 
Now Sister Etter wanted me to preach!
I went on with the singing and got into the second song. I felt that little tap on my 
shoulder again. This time Sister Etter was more forceful. “Brother, don’t fail God. He 
wants you to preach here tonight.”
I hardly knew what to say. I had come to hear this great woman preach, and now 
she was asking me, a novice, to preach to this huge crowd.
I ﬁ  nished the song service and sat down.
When the time came for me to preach, I had decided I would preach along the line

[125] she was asking me, a novice, to preach to this huge crowd.
I ﬁ  nished the song service and sat down.
When the time came for me to preach, I had decided I would preach along the line 
I had preached the previous Sunday night in my church—on the coming of the Lord.
But the Holy Spirit had other plans.
After Sister Etter announced that I would be speaking, I stood to my feet and 
walked toward the pulpit. I had only taken a few steps when suddenly a passage from 
the 5th chapter of John ﬂ  ashed through my mind: “Wilt thou be made whole?”
I took the passage for my text, and the Spirit of God preached that whole sermon 
through me. I really listened to myself preach. God moved through the audience in a 
miraculous manner.
It wasn’t me. It was the Holy Spirit. I was just a young preacher and didn’t know 
how to handle a crowd like this one. The Spirit moved!
That service has been one of the mountain peaks of my Christian experience.

[126] how to handle a crowd like this one. The Spirit moved!
That service has been one of the mountain peaks of my Christian experience. 
—Aaron A. Wilson, “A Mountain Peak of My Spiritual Experience” 
Assemblies of God Heritage 4 (winter 1984–85):12.
 Aaron A. Wilson
I Listened to Myself Preach, continued
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[127] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
WILLIAM J. MITCHELL 
(1878–1958)
The testimony of many Pentecostals who entered the ministry involved several 
common ingredients: salvation, healing or deliverance from a chemical addiction, 
Spirit baptism, and a divine call to evangelism. Pentecostals believed this made up 
for whatever shortcomings one might have had in upbringing, education, or social 
graces. William J. Mitchell, born and reared in Newfoundland in eastern Canada, left 
school while in the third grade and went to sea as a cabin boy at eleven. It was far 
from a promising start.
Sailing around the world with hard-drink-
ing crews, he became an alcoholic while still a 
young man. Desperate to overcome his addic-
tion, according to his son, Allen, once Mitchell 
even made a “blood vow,” cutting his wrist and 
“then writing in his own blood, he vowed never 
to drink again. But it was to no avail.”
In 1900 he met and married Susanna Patience 
Curnew in St. John’s, New foundland, and a year

[128] “then writing in his own blood, he vowed never 
to drink again. But it was to no avail.”
In 1900 he met and married Susanna Patience 
Curnew in St. John’s, New foundland, and a year 
later, she gave birth to the fi  rst of their thirteen 
children. Following the large migration of New-
foundlanders to New England and especially to 
Massachusetts, the Mitchells settled in Chelsea, 
where he began work as a carpenter. After the birth 
of their second daughter, they discovered that she 
had epilepsy, so they moved to Zion City, Illinois, 
noted for John Alexander Dowie’s healing ministry. 
The timing of Mitchell’s salvation and the move were very close. The Zion saints prayed 
for the girl, and she never again experienced a seizure. The family remained there until 
1905, when Dowie had a stroke and the community entered a period of turmoil.
Returning to Chelsea, Mitchell started an independent mission on Park Street in

[129] 1905, when Dowie had a stroke and the community entered a period of turmoil.
Returning to Chelsea, Mitchell started an independent mission on Park Street in 
a former saloon. When news of the Pentecostal outpouring began to circulate in New 
England, he sent out an appeal for workers who had experienced speaking in tongues 
according to Acts 2:4 to visit them. Several responded, including two women, Mabel 
Smith and Jean Campbell (and possibly Charles F. Parham himself). Smith and Camp-
bell had been baptized in the Spirit during the Pentecostal revival in Zion City under 
Parham’s ministry. An outpouring of the Spirit in Chelsea, however, eluded them. But 
when Brother and Sister Sankey Lee came from Texas in the spring of 1907, Mitchell 
and others were baptized in the Spirit. After the Lees departed, Mitchell said, “I con-
tinued to carry on the meetings the rest of the year, besides working at my trade as

[130] and others were baptized in the Spirit. After the Lees departed, Mitchell said, “I con-
tinued to carry on the meetings the rest of the year, besides working at my trade as 
a carpenter. The news spread that the Lord was blessing, so that people came from 
everywhere, making it necessary for us to move into a larger building.”
238
 Susanna and William Mitchell
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[131] COOPERATIVE FELLOWSHIP
239
A Few Hints to Preachers
M
ake no apologies. If you 
have the Lord’s mes-
sage, deliver it; if not, hold 
your peace. Have [a] short 
preface or introduction. Say 
your best things ﬁ  rst, and stop 
before you get prosey. Do not 
spoil the appetite for dinner 
by too much thin soup. Leave 
self out of the pulpit and take 
Jesus in....
If you do not want to 
“‘break,” make your shirt col-
lar an inch larger, and give 
your blood a chance to ﬂ  ow 
back to the heart. Don’t get 
excited too soon. Do not run 
away from your hearers. Engine driving-wheels ﬂ  y fast with no load, but when 
they draw anything they go slower.
Do not scold the people. Do not abuse the faithful souls who come to 
meeting [on] rainy days, because of the others who do not come. Preach the 
best to small congregations. Jesus preached to one woman at the well, and 
she got all Samaria out to hear Him next time.
Do not repeat, saying, “‘as I said before.” If you said it before, say some-

[132] best to small congregations. Jesus preached to one woman at the well, and 
she got all Samaria out to hear Him next time.
Do not repeat, saying, “‘as I said before.” If you said it before, say some-
thing else after. Leave out words you cannot deﬁ  ne. Stop your declamation 
and talk to folks. Come down from stilted and sacred tones, and become a lit-
tle child. Change the subject, if it goes hard. Do not tire yourself and every one 
else out. Do not preach till the middle of your sermon buries the beginning, 
and is buried in the end. Look the people in the face, and live so that you are 
not afraid of them.
Take long breaths, ﬁ  ll your lungs and keep them full. Stop to breathe 
before the air is exhausted. Then you will not ﬁ  nish each sentence-ah, with a 
terrible gasp-ah, and so strain the lungs-ah, as if you were dying for air-ah, and 
never ﬁ  nd it out-ah, because their friends dare not tell them-ah, and so leave

[133] terrible gasp-ah, and so strain the lungs-ah, as if you were dying for air-ah, and 
never ﬁ  nd it out-ah, because their friends dare not tell them-ah, and so leave 
them to make sport of the Philistines-ah. Inﬂ  ate your lungs. It is easier to run 
a mill with a full pond than an empty one. Be moderate at ﬁ  rst. Hoist the gate 
a little way; when you are half through, raise a little more; when nearly done, 
put on a full head of water.
Aim at the mark. Hit it. Shoot, and see where the shot struck, and then ﬁ re 
another broadside. Pack your sermons, make your words like bullets.
—Burt McCafferty, “A Few Hints to Preachers,” 
Weekly Evangel (January 27, 1917): 7.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[134] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
As the revival continued, participants started new missions in different parts of 
New England. This dispersion was reinforced by the great Chelsea fi  re of 1908, in 
which half the city—including Mitchell’s mission and all the family’s possessions—
was destroyed. 
Providing for such a large family was no small task. When Mitchell started Glad 
Tidings Tabernacle in Everett, Massachusetts, he continued working at his trade to 
increase his income. However, it also gave him valuable contact with other men on 
the job. One acquaintance remembered: “Many of his parishioners were carpenters, 
painters and iron workers. Hence, he had contact with them during working days 
and situations. He . . . was the example which led so many of them to salvation and 
membership in the church.”
His reputation for evangelism, church planting, and prayer led to his election in 
1936 as superintendent of the New England District Council. Mitchell served in this

[135] membership in the church.”
His reputation for evangelism, church planting, and prayer led to his election in 
1936 as superintendent of the New England District Council. Mitchell served in this 
capacity for two years. Throughout his ministry, he kept contact with other Pentecos-
tals in the region as well, including Christine Gibson, founder of Zion Bible Institute 
in Rhode Island. The advance of Pentecostalism in New England is part of the legacy 
of William Mitchell and other pioneers who believed the reports about the outpour-
ing of the Spirit, experienced it for themselves, and declared it to others.
RECOMMENDED READING
Bazán, Demetrio, Sr. Autobiographia de Demetrio Bazán. Unpublished ms., 1975.
Bazan, Nellie. Enviados de Dios: Demetrio Y Nellie Bazan. Miami, FL: Editorial Vida, 1987.
Blumhofer, Edith. “The Role of Women in the Assemblies of God.” Assemblies of God Heritage 7 
(winter 1987–1988): 13–17.

[136] Blumhofer, Edith. “The Role of Women in the Assemblies of God.” Assemblies of God Heritage 7 
(winter 1987–1988): 13–17.
Gohr, Glenn. “Ben Hardin: A Man with a Heart for Evangelism.” Assemblies of God Heritage 15 
(winter 1995–1996): 7–11, 23.
———. “A Dedicated Ministry Among Hispanics: Demetrio and Nellie Bazán.” Assemblies of God 
Heritage 9 (fall 1989): 7–9, 17.
———. “A Harvest in Minnesota: The Story of A/G Pioneer Frank J. Lindquist.” Assemblies of God 
Heritage 10 (spring 1990): 10–13.
Janes, Burton K. “William J. Mitchell: A Pentecostal Pioneer in New England.” Parts 1 and 2. 
Assemblies of God Heritage 12 (winter 1992–1993): 10–12, 24–25; 13 (spring 1993): 22–24, 33–34.
Lock, Anna B. “From the Underworld to the Upperworld.” Assemblies of God Heritage 14 (summer 
1994): 19–21.
Pennington, Edith Mae. From the Footlights to the Light of the Cross. Shreveport, La.: Plant of 
Renown, n.d.
———. Should Women Preach the Gospel? Shreveport, La.: Plant of Renown, 1982.

[137] Pennington, Edith Mae. From the Footlights to the Light of the Cross. Shreveport, La.: Plant of 
Renown, n.d.
———. Should Women Preach the Gospel? Shreveport, La.: Plant of Renown, 1982.
Stump, Elva K. “A Miracle of Healing.” Assemblies of God Heritage 14 (spring 1994): 14–15.
Saggio, Joseph J., and Jim Dempsey. American Indian College: A Witness to the Tribes. Springfi eld, 
MO: Gospel Publishing House, 2008.
Warner, Wayne. “From the Footlights to the Light of the Cross: The Story of Evangelist Edith 
Mae Pennington.” Assemblies of God Heritage 7 (winter 1987–1988): 6–9, 20.
240
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[138] 241
I
n late summer 1930, William I. Evans, the “principal” of Central Bible Institute 
(CBI) announced that the school year would begin on September 26, and there 
was still room for more students. “We are looking for Jesus to come and, in conse-
quence of that glorious event, we may never conduct the [term],” he remarked. “We 
thank God for the blessed hope. . . . However, we are occupying till He comes. That 
occupation with us is making this Institute count for the very most in the advance-
ment of the Kingdom.” The school preferred mature and “diligent students of the 
Word,” nineteen years of age and older. Accepting applicants below this age might 
mean that at graduation three years later, they could still be “too young to be trusted 
with the responsibilities involved.”
Evans lamented that fi  nding students with the “highest type of consecration 
among us is getting rarer.” Life at a Bible institute contrasted sharply with campus

[139] Evans lamented that fi  nding students with the “highest type of consecration 
among us is getting rarer.” Life at a Bible institute contrasted sharply with campus 
life at colleges and universities. Preeminently an experience in spiritual formation, it 
demanded a high level of dedication to stay the course.
The “standards of holiness” required separation from worldly values. “It grieves 
our hearts and we could weep,” he added in disappointment, “when we see world 
conformity among Bible school graduates!” Women especially seem to have been 
the culprits: “We have seen pastors’ wives and lady pastors and leaders dressed so 
much like the world as to show no line of separation.” Hence, “short skirts, low necks, 
sheer clothes, adornments, and worldly style of hair dress, are inexcusable. Certainly 
religion does not consist in what we wear, but genuine religion of the kind we profess 
will show itself in these matters.” Hopefully, “only . . . serious-minded youths will

[140] religion does not consist in what we wear, but genuine religion of the kind we profess 
will show itself in these matters.” Hopefully, “only . . . serious-minded youths will 
care to apply themselves to [the school’s] rigor.” 
Although strict discipline characterized all the schools, the atmosphere could 
hardly be described as dull or without humor. Instead, both students and faculty 
members shared a common commitment for the evangelization of the world. Refl ect-
ing the desire of church leaders and grassroots believers alike, Evans pleaded, “We 
want all its facilities from walls and roof to the services of consecrated instructors to 
produce the very utmost in lives for the Kingdom.”
CHAPTER 14 
TEACHING
THE SAINTS
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[141] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
Alumni from Assemblies of God schools often recall classroom instructors who 
profoundly impacted their lives. Since these institutions were ventures of faith, fac-
ulty members worked long hours, struggled with low pay, and frequently received lit-
tle recognition for their sacrifi cial efforts. In a report published in the Pentecostal Evan-
gel about the 1937 commencement at Latin American Bible Institute in San Antonio 
and the thirty-fi  ve men and women who graduated, the writer attributed the success 
of the school to the sacrifi  ces of the staff: “Much credit is due to Brother Ball and the 
group of workers who have been assisting him as teachers in the school, since funds 
have never been very plentiful so as to enable anyone to be really remunerated for 
his services; but each has given his time and effort willingly as unto the Lord, trusting 
God for the supply of his individual needs.”

[142] his services; but each has given his time and effort willingly as unto the Lord, trusting 
God for the supply of his individual needs.”
Most churches did not fi  nancially support these schools for several reasons: 
First, they sometimes preferred spending their monies on local church ministries 
and/or foreign missions. Second, a long-standing fear of educational preparation 
made many wary of Bible institutes. Third, since the schools operated on faith, God 
would somehow provide for them; indeed, strong fi  nancial backing might jeopardize 
their spiritual vigor. Despite the handicaps that worked against their effectiveness, 
teachers contributed heavily to the spiritual formation of thousands of pastors, evan-
gelists, missionaries, and other church workers.
242
Classes Start at LABI
I
n about a month the Latin-American Bible Institute in Saspamco, Texas, will open its 
doors again for another school year. From all along the Mexican border and also from

[143] 242
Classes Start at LABI
I
n about a month the Latin-American Bible Institute in Saspamco, Texas, will open its 
doors again for another school year. From all along the Mexican border and also from 
several states of this country, young men and women will gather in for another year 
of study and training for the ministry among their own Spanish-speaking people. Year 
after year the institute turns out Spirit-ﬁ  lled and trained workers who are doing effec-
tive work in bringing the gospel to the Latin-American ﬁ elds.
The Bible Institute is located on a large farm near Saspamco, where the students 
help with the raising of produce for the table as well as feed for the cows 
Classes Start at LABI Continued
and pigs. Mr. Einar Peterson, a worker in the institute, has just been visiting the 
Missions Department. From him we learn that the school will be opening under a seri-
ous handicap this fall in that there are no crops this year because of drought. The same

[144] Missions Department. From him we learn that the school will be opening under a seri-
ous handicap this fall in that there are no crops this year because of drought. The same 
condition at the homes of the students will prevent many of them from coming to school 
unless funds can be provided from some other source.
As we bring this urgent need before our Evangel readers, we trust the Lord will 
lay it upon some hearts to help, for we believe that funds invested in the school will 
yield good dividends in the Kingdom of God. Offerings may be sent to the Foreign Mis-
sions Department, 336 West Paciﬁ  c Street, Springﬁ  eld, Missouri, designated for the 
Latin-American Bible Institute in care of H. C. Ball. They would also be grateful for farm 
produce or canned goods sent direct to the Latin-American Bible Institute, Post Oﬃ  ce 
Box 113, Saspamco, Texas.
—“Missionary School Opening,” Pentecostal Evangel (September 23, 1939): 8.

[145] produce or canned goods sent direct to the Latin-American Bible Institute, Post Oﬃ  ce 
Box 113, Saspamco, Texas.
—“Missionary School Opening,” Pentecostal Evangel (September 23, 1939): 8.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[146] Educators presented in this chapter include Peter C. Nelson, Myer Pearlman, 
Marcus L. Grable, Christine Gibson, and Stanley H. Frodsham. Gibson, founder of 
the independent Zion Bible Institute in Rhode Island, never held credentials with the 
General Council. Yet hundreds of Assemblies of God ministers received their training 
there; her story deserves to be told. Stanley H. Frodsham, long-time editor of the 
Pentecostal Evangel, has also been included. While he did some teaching at CBI, his 
contributions lie in his editorial work and many books. Through these means, he 
contributed to ministerial preparation formally and informally. Many who couldn’t 
attend the Bible institutes depended on the Evangel for instruction, sermon ideas, 
and Sunday School lessons.
PETER C. NELSON
(1868–1942)
Generally, Pentecostals looked down on academic degrees as more of a hindrance 
than help for Spirit-fi  lled ministry. For example, one early Council leader recalled,

[147] PETER C. NELSON
(1868–1942)
Generally, Pentecostals looked down on academic degrees as more of a hindrance 
than help for Spirit-fi  lled ministry. For example, one early Council leader recalled, 
“the use of ‘big’ words was gen-
erally detested. The preachers 
were never called ‘Reverend.’ 
Everybody was brother and sister 
so and so. D.D. [doctor of divin-
ity] was invariably interpreted to 
mean ‘Dumb Dogs’ [Isaiah 56:10, 
KJV].”
“P . C.” Nelson, however, knew 
the value of formal preparation 
for ministry. An American Baptist 
pastor who became a Pentecostal 
in 1920, he had graduated from 
Denison University in Ohio and 
studied under one of America’s foremost theologians, Augustus H. Strong, at the 
Rochester (New York) Theological Seminary. Yet such training had not been an easy 
thing for him to acquire.
Nelson’s family migrated to Iowa from Denmark. At twenty he felt called to the 
ministry, but his early attempts at preaching were so discouraging that he renounced

[148] thing for him to acquire.
Nelson’s family migrated to Iowa from Denmark. At twenty he felt called to the 
ministry, but his early attempts at preaching were so discouraging that he renounced 
his call and he despaired spiritually. “The diffi  culties and ridicule to which [I] was 
subjected were too heavy for [me] to bear alone,” he wrote, “being without a spiritual 
adviser, and without anyone to encourage [me] to go forward.” This proved to be the 
darkest time in his life: “All hope of Heaven being gone, [I] wandered in darkness, in 
the blackest darkness.”
Morning dawned at last, however, when he met J.F. Bryant in 1888, a Baptist pas-
tor in Harland, Iowa. Although Nelson thought he had committed the unpardonable 
sin against the Holy Spirit (Matthew 12:31), his faith and calling were renewed under 
TEACHING THE SAINTS
243
Peter C. Nelson

[149] sin against the Holy Spirit (Matthew 12:31), his faith and calling were renewed under 
TEACHING THE SAINTS
243
Peter C. Nelson
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[150] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
Bryant’s infl  uence. Enrolling at a Baptist seminary in the Chicago area a year later, he 
found that without an undergraduate degree he was not prepared, so he switched to 
Denison University in Ohio. To cover his expenses, he worked as a manual laborer. 
While there he met his wife, Myrtle Garmong, who then helped him complete the 
program (in seven years).
Still feeling unprepared, he enrolled at Rochester Seminary in 1899. Augustus 
H. Strong, the president and professor of theology, taught the courses in systematic 
theology, and Nelson became one of his students. Strong’s Systematic Theology, fi  rst 
published in 1886, had gone through seven editions and reached nearly twelve hun-
dred pages by the time he got there. “I have discarded none of the Baptist  doctrines,” 
he reminisced many years later, “but have built a story or two on the good solid foun-
dation laid for our faith.”
Following graduation, he evangelized and pastored several churches before

[151] he reminisced many years later, “but have built a story or two on the good solid foun-
dation laid for our faith.”
Following graduation, he evangelized and pastored several churches before 
being called to pastor Conley Memorial Baptist Church in Detroit. His contact with 
Pentecostals began in 1920, but they failed to impress him. Nevertheless, a healing 
from a serious and possibly life-threatening infection led him to begin preaching on 
divine healing. But the congregation refused to accept this new teaching, and before 
long he resigned. Shortly after, he was baptized in the Spirit and joined the Assem-
blies of God. 
By now over fi  fty years old and a seasoned minister, he detected that many young 
people in the Assemblies of God were entering the ministry just like he had: with little 
preparation. In 1927 he moved to Enid, Oklahoma, where he founded a church and 
opened Southwestern Bible School. Like Alice E. Luce and Henry C. Ball, Nelson

[152] preparation. In 1927 he moved to Enid, Oklahoma, where he founded a church and 
opened Southwestern Bible School. Like Alice E. Luce and Henry C. Ball, Nelson 
recognized the need for Pentecostal curricular materials. This led him to write several 
books, including The Young Minister’s Guide (1932) and Bible Doctrines (1934), his best 
known. Before his death, Southwestern Bible School merged with two other schools 
244
Commencement Exercises
A
pril 14th the second annual commencement exercises of Southwestern Bible 
School, Enid, Okla., were held in the First Methodist Episcopal Church. A class of 
nine young men and thirteen young women—gathered from all over this country—
received diplomas. The musical numbers, both vocal and instrumental, as well as the 
[student] addresses were of high order. . . . 
On Sunday, the 12th, General Superintendent
E. S. Williams [had] preach ed the baccalaureate sermon in Enid Gospel Taberna-

[153] [student] addresses were of high order. . . . 
On Sunday, the 12th, General Superintendent
E. S. Williams [had] preach ed the baccalaureate sermon in Enid Gospel Taberna-
cle, from 1 Thess. 2:8. In the evening he delivered a missionary address after which 
Pastor Nelson asked all the students who felt the call of God upon their lives to foreign 
missionary service, to come forward, and ﬁ  fty-ﬁ ve responded. The missionary spirit 
in Southwestern has been growing, and many are now ready to go to distant lands as 
soon as they can be sent forth.
—P. C. Nelson, “Commencement Exercises at Southwestern Bible School,” 
Pentecostal Evangel (May 16, 1931): 12.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[154] (Shield of Faith Bible School and Southern Bible College) to form what is now known 
as Southwestern Assemblies of God University in Waxahachie, Texas, a fi tting legacy 
for a man who knew what it was to be ill prepared for the ministry.
MYER PEARLMAN
(1898–1943)
The personalities in this chapter came from widely different backgrounds, and 
Myer Pearlman was no exception. The eldest son of a 
Jewish family, he studied at a synagogue school in Bir-
mingham, England. In school he remembered learning 
the Jewish version of the three R’s: the Jewish faith, the 
Torah (Old Testament), and the Hebrew language. “I was 
taught,” he recalled, “that while I  was to be a patriotic 
Englishman, I was also a Jew, a member of the nation, and 
that I was different from other people. I remember passing 
meat markets, and inwardly thanking God that I did not 
eat unclean meat.”
The economic situation in England forced his  father 
to move the family to the United States in hopes of gain-

[155] meat markets, and inwardly thanking God that I did not 
eat unclean meat.”
The economic situation in England forced his  father 
to move the family to the United States in hopes of gain-
ing employment and improving their living standard. After settling in New York City in 
1915, the younger Pearlman eventually enlisted in the U.S. Army and served eighteen 
months in the medical corps in France. His profi ciency in French helped him in this 
capacity. After the war, he traveled to California where “groping for light I began to 
read religious books and attend services.” 
Sometime later, walking by a mission in San Francisco, he noticed a crowd gath-
ered at the entrance and stopped to listen to the music. On another evening, he 
stood outside again. Mustering his courage, he entered and took a seat. He was par-
ticularly impressed by the music, especially the song “Honey in the Rock,” written by 
F.A. Graves. Based on Deuteronomy 32:13 (“he nourished [Israel] with honey from

[156] ticularly impressed by the music, especially the song “Honey in the Rock,” written by 
F.A. Graves. Based on Deuteronomy 32:13 (“he nourished [Israel] with honey from 
the rock”), it tells of God’s grace and provision from an unexpected source. Verse two 
asks, “Have you ‘tasted that the Lord is gracious?’ Do you walk in the way that’s new? 
Have you drunk from the living fountain? There’s Honey in the Rock [Jesus Christ] 
for you.” Attending nightly, he eventually confessed his sins and became a Christian, 
praying “in the name of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.”
In 1922, Pearlman enrolled at Central Bible Institute, where he later met 
his wife, Irene Graves, daughter of the songwriter. A brilliant student and self-
taught in many areas, he read the Scriptures in Hebrew, Greek, Spanish, French, 
and Italian. At graduation time, the principal, Frank M. Boyd, invited him to join 
the faculty. Pearlman accepted and taught there from 1924 until his death in 1943.

[157] and Italian. At graduation time, the principal, Frank M. Boyd, invited him to join 
the faculty. Pearlman accepted and taught there from 1924 until his death in 1943. 
Since teachers were not paid when classes were out in the summer, he wrote 
materials for Gospel Publishing House to earn additional money. Before long, 
he became the writer of Adult Sunday School Teacher and The Adult and Young  People’s 
TEACHING THE SAINTS
245
 Myer Pearlman
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[158] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
Teachers’ Quarterly. With his increasing responsibilities, he divided his days between 
classroom instruction in the morning and writing in the afternoons at the publishing 
house. 
Over time, he became a widely read author in Pentecostal circles, producing 
Sunday School materials as well as a number of books. In 1937, he wrote his most 
enduring work, Knowing the Doctrines of the Bible, a four-hundred-page survey of doctrine. 
Theologian Russell P . Spittler has described it as “the theological jewel of classi-
cal Pentecostalism’s middle period—written after the era of tracts, at the throes of 
self-conscious polemic, and before the ‘evangelicalization’ of Pentecostalism led to 
the training of its teachers in places like Wheaton College and the interdenomina-
tional theological seminaries.” He notes in particular Pearlman’s careful refl  ection, 
balance, nontechnical language, and irenic tone.

[159] tional theological seminaries.” He notes in particular Pearlman’s careful refl  ection, 
balance, nontechnical language, and irenic tone.
Pearlman’s workload continued to grow: more writing, teaching, camp meet-
ings. World War II being in progress, he was approached about starting a publication 
for servicemen. Having been a serviceman, feeling he could identify with them, he 
accepted. What seemed to be a modest effort became the well-circulated paper called 
Reveille; it grew into the Servicemen’s Department. But the pace was beginning to tell 
on Pearlman; he was encouraged to slow down and rest. The assistant general super-
intendent, Ralph M. Riggs, wrote him, “You could coast . . . from now on and still 
come out ahead of the rest of us.” Eventually his health broke, and he died in a vet-
eran’s hospital; he was forty-fi  ve. Among the fl  oral arrangements at his funeral, two 
symbolized his spiritual pilgrimage: a large Star of David made of blue fl  owers sent by

[160] eran’s hospital; he was forty-fi  ve. Among the fl  oral arrangements at his funeral, two 
symbolized his spiritual pilgrimage: a large Star of David made of blue fl  owers sent by 
Jewish friends and a cross made of white fl  owers from his Gentile friends.
MARCUS L. GRABLE 
(1891–1970)
At an interdenominational revival held at the Shrine Mosque in Springfi eld, Mis-
souri, in 1933, Marcus Grable fi  rst encountered Ralph Riggs, then pastor of Central 
Assembly of God. Area pastors had been invited to give the invocation at the meetings, 
and one evening Riggs offered the prayer. Afterward, Grable turned to his wife and said, 
“That man knows God.” Before long, the Grables joined the Assemblies of God. Riggs 
246
Doctrinal Knowledge Is Essential
S
trong beliefs make for strong character; clear-cut beliefs make for clear-cut con-
victions. Of course, a person’s doctrinal belief is not his religion any more than

[161] S
trong beliefs make for strong character; clear-cut beliefs make for clear-cut con-
victions. Of course, a person’s doctrinal belief is not his religion any more than 
the backbone is the man’s personality. But as good backbone is an essential part of 
the man’s body, so a deﬁ nite system of belief is an essential part of a man’s religion. 
It has been well said that “a man does not need to wear his backbone in front of him, 
but he must have a backbone and a straight one or he will be a [shapeless], if not a 
humpbacked, Christian.
—Myer Pearlman, Knowing the Doctrines of the Bible (1937), 9–10.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[162] and Grable, a minister and a layman, soon found they shared a common concern: pro-
moting Sunday Schools and teacher training. Little did Riggs know when he prayed that 
night that he would inspire another Sunday School enthusiast like himself.
Grable had been converted at the Christian Church in Egerton, Missouri, in 1901, 
and through the years worked in different leadership roles in local Sunday Schools. 
After moving to Springfi  eld and joining Central Assembly, he started working as a 
janitor at Gospel Publishing House. In his spare time, he assisted in the opening 
of three branch Sunday Schools in the community. At work, he asked for a desk and 
typewriter to answer inquiries about Sunday School matters that arrived from around 
the country.
Recognizing the need for better training and standardizing Sunday School pro-
grams, and noting the obvious skills and enthusiasm of Grable, the Executive Presby-

[163] the country.
Recognizing the need for better training and standardizing Sunday School pro-
grams, and noting the obvious skills and enthusiasm of Grable, the Executive Presby-
tery appointed him in 1935 to lead and develop the newly established Sunday School 
Promotion Department. His offi  ce began with a steel table, a chair, and a typewriter. 
From modest beginnings, this devoted layman aggressively built a national program 
that saw phenomenal growth before his resignation from offi  ce fourteen years later. 
He became the General Council’s “Mr. Sunday School.” During his years in offi  ce, 
Assemblies of God Sunday Schools expanded by 300 percent, leading all other church 
groups in growth.
Two chief objectives guided his plans: teacher training and Sunday School con-
ventions. For example, shortly after taking offi  ce, he sent every pastor a compli-
mentary copy of Riggs’s Successful Sunday School. In conjunction with this, he intro-

[164] ventions. For example, shortly after taking offi  ce, he sent every pastor a compli-
mentary copy of Riggs’s Successful Sunday School. In conjunction with this, he intro-
duced a “Training for Christian Service” course that laid the groundwork for the 
national Workers Training program. Standards for local Sunday Schools were also set. 
To offer further assistance, he launched Our Sunday School Counselor in 1939, the offi cial 
publication for Assemblies of God Sunday Schools, and later the [Sunday School] 
Superintendent’s Assistant. 
Grable’s second objective focused on 
sponsoring national and regional Sunday 
School conventions. The fi  rst of eleven 
national conventions gathered in Spring-
fi eld, Missouri, in 1940. Near the end of 
his tenure, the Sunday School Department 
introduced the Boys and Girls Missionary 
Crusade (BGMC) at the National Sunday 
School Convention in Springfi  eld in 1949 
to promote missions among the children 
and raise funds for various projects.

[165] Crusade (BGMC) at the National Sunday 
School Convention in Springfi  eld in 1949 
to promote missions among the children 
and raise funds for various projects.
With failing health he resigned 
in 1949, but remained in Springfi  eld. 
 Ironically, he felt that a minister would 
serve the offi  ce better. In retirement, his 
TEACHING THE SAINTS
247
 Early in 1942 the national Sunday School  Department 
mailed this Lighthouse Sunday School poster to 
5,000 AG Sunday Schools. Promoting the Lighthouse 
idea are (l to r): J. Z. Kamerer, general manager of 
Gospel Publishing House; Loine Honderick, Sunday 
School representative; and Marcus L. Grable, “Mr. 
Sunday School.”
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[166] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
interest in Sunday Schools never fl  agged. Four days before his death in 1970, he 
participated in a parade that was part of a kid’s crusade at Calvary Temple Assembly 
of God. Dressed as a farmer, he pushed a wheelbarrow on the three-mile parade 
route with a display he had made himself. The sign on it summed up his life’s work: 
“Pushin’ for Our Kids.”
CHRISTINE A. GIBSON
(1879–1955)
At the dinner hour at Zion Bible Institute in East Providence, Rhode Island, barely 
enough food to eat could be found in the pantry. Zion’s stance as a “faith school” 
would again be tested. “Mother” Gibson rose to the occasion and led the students 
in singing the Doxology. As they sang “Praise God from whom all blessings fl  ow,” a 
truckload of canned goods, fruits, vegetables, and staples arrived, along with a cash 
offering. It had come as a gift from friends in western New York. Dinner was soon on 
the table. The story of Christine Gibson abounds with

[167] offering. It had come as a gift from friends in western New York. Dinner was soon on 
the table. The story of Christine Gibson abounds with 
such stories of faith, divine guidance through visions 
and dreams, and the pursuit of the ministry to which 
God had called her.
Her parents having died when she was quite young, 
Christine Eckman was reared by her grandmother in 
Georgetown, British Guiana (present-day Guyana in 
South America). She attended a Pres byterian school. 
As a young adult, her life and enjoyments were similar 
to those of other young women her age. One evening 
while on her way to a dance, a girlfriend asked her if she 
would mind going with her to visit briefl  y a Salvation 
Army offi  cer who had become ill. When he learned of 
their plans to go dancing, he looked at Christine and 
said, “A little dance, a little hell; a little dance, a little 
hell.” She took offense, but his words haunted her.
248
Why a National Sunday School Convention?
T

[168] said, “A little dance, a little hell; a little dance, a little 
hell.” She took offense, but his words haunted her.
248
Why a National Sunday School Convention?
T
he evangelistic use of the Sunday School (and oh, what an evangelizing agency a 
Sunday School is!) is discovered to be not just an available means for the growth 
and extension of our own Sunday School and church, but it becomes a path of duty and 
obedience. The sheep and lambs out there all around us are His sheep and lambs, and 
He says He (and we) must bring them in. Our determination to succeed in our Sunday 
School work deepens into a solemn resolve to obey our Master at any . . . cost. He will 
be with us in this as in every other phase of obedience to the Great Commission.
—Ralph M. Riggs, “Why a National Sunday School Convention,” 
Pentecostal Evangel (February 24, 1952): 5.
 Christine A. Gibson

[169] —Ralph M. Riggs, “Why a National Sunday School Convention,” 
Pentecostal Evangel (February 24, 1952): 5.
 Christine A. Gibson
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[170] On her way home from work a few days later, she felt compelled to enter a nearby 
Roman Catholic Church. Kneeling before the altar, she experienced a vision of Christ’s 
crucifi xion and heard the words: “Do you see that Man on the cross? He took the sin-
ner’s place. He became sin for a lost world. You are a sinner. He died in your stead. 
You can have His righteousness, for He is your salvation.” This brought about her 
conversion; soon after, she affi rmed her faith at the Salvation Army “barracks” (chapel). 
Feeling called to mission work two years later, she went into the interior of her 
own country to take over the mission station of a missionary who had become too ill 
to continue. Unfortunately, Christine quickly felt the ravages of malaria, but trusting 
in Christ as her Healer, she refused to take quinine. With her health broken, she had 
no alternative but to return to Georgetown. Then, leaving a failed marriage behind,

[171] in Christ as her Healer, she refused to take quinine. With her health broken, she had 
no alternative but to return to Georgetown. Then, leaving a failed marriage behind, 
she immigrated to the United States and began preaching in holiness circles before 
settling in East Providence, Rhode Island. There she joined Alpheus Angel Cleve-
land’s Church of the First Born (later Zion Gospel Temple). 
Christine heard about the Pentecostal revival from several friends. One of them, 
Reuben A. Gibson, a Christian and Missionary Alliance pastor, had attended the 
revival that took place at the Missionary Training Institute in Nyack, New York, in May 
1907. Several weeks later, she visited the Rochester Bible Training School directed by 
Elizabeth V. Baker and her four sisters. During a morning devotional hour, she was 
baptized in the Spirit.
In 1920 Christine and Reuben were married and worked together in ministry.

[172] Elizabeth V. Baker and her four sisters. During a morning devotional hour, she was 
baptized in the Spirit.
In 1920 Christine and Reuben were married and worked together in ministry. 
Eventually, she became pastor of the church in East Providence and director of its 
faith home. Four years later (and just months after the death of her husband), she 
opened the doors of Mount Zion Bible School. She renamed it the School of the 
Prophets a year later; in 1936 the name changed again to Zion Bible Institute. (In 
1999, Zion Bible Institute, now located in Barrington, Rhode Island, became an 
endorsed college of the Assemblies of God dedicated solely to ministerial training.)
TEACHING THE SAINTS
249
NCBI Announcement 
N
orth Central Bible Institute and Business College, Minneapolis, Minn., will begin 
its 10th year [on] Sept. 18. It offers thorough training in Bible subjects in a three 
year, two year, or one year course. A. G. Ward, formerly of Toronto, Canada, has now

[173] its 10th year [on] Sept. 18. It offers thorough training in Bible subjects in a three 
year, two year, or one year course. A. G. Ward, formerly of Toronto, Canada, has now 
joined our Faculty. Thorough training in Secretarial, Accounting, Bookkeeping, Short-
hand, Typesetting, Business English, and Commercial Law, with actual oﬃ  ce practice 
is offered. Dormitory and class rooms in modern ﬁ  re-proof building in the heart of the 
city. Splendid opportunities for part time employment for students, and also for practi-
cal Christian work in the Twin Cities. Only Christian students accepted.
For catalogs and literature write to 900 Elliot Ave. S., Minneapolis, Minn.
—Frank J. Lindquist,
“North Central Bible Institute and Business College,” 
Pentecostal Evangel (September 16, 1939): 15
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[174] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
Founded on faith in God’s provision, the institute’s operation was described by 
Mary Campbell Wilson, Gibson’s biographer: “No charges of any kind were placed 
upon the students. They came, and everyone trusted God to supply the needs of Zion. 
Were it not for the stand that she took, many would have been denied the privilege of 
Bible school training. Sister Gibson championed the rights of the poor, and the rights 
of all men to study the Word of God.”
After the closing of Rochester Bible Training School and Bethel Bible Training 
School in the 1920s, and the gradual decline of Beulah Heights Bible and Missionary 
Training Institute, other schools appeared on the scene. These included Metropolitan 
Bible Institute in Suffern, New York, and New England Bible Institute in Framingham, 
Massachusetts. 
In response to the need for training, even more schools came into being, this 
time in Pennsylvania. After becoming superintendent of the Eastern district in 1929,

[175] Massachusetts. 
In response to the need for training, even more schools came into being, this 
time in Pennsylvania. After becoming superintendent of the Eastern district in 1929, 
J. Roswell Flower and his wife, Alice Reynolds Flower, started a summer Bible school 
three years later at the Maranatha Park campground in Green Lane. In 1938, a perma-
nent institution began at the same site, Eastern Bible Institute (present-day Valley 
Forge Christian College in Phoenixville, Pennsylvania), with former missionary Allan 
Swift as its fi  rst president. Each of these schools prepared men and women who 
became Assemblies of God ministers, missionaries, and trained laypersons.
250
President Milton T. Wells teaching a class at Eastern Bible Institute in Green Lane, Pennsylvania
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[176] STANLEY H. FRODSHAM
(1882–1969)
“We are praying for God’s man; are you that man?” asked John W. Welch, the 
general chairman of the Assemblies of God in 1916. While thanking Stanley H. Frod-
sham for three articles that he had submitted to the Pentecostal 
Evangel, Welch took the opportunity to ask him about being its 
editor. Frodsham’s acceptance of the invitation propelled this 
Britisher into a national leadership role in the Assemblies of 
God that would continue for the next three decades.
Few people were better qualifi ed than Frodsham. In his 
native England he had edited Victory, a monthly periodical 
that reported Pentecostal revivals around the world. Besides 
his skillful writing and absolute dedication to the task of pub-
licizing the Pentecostal message, he also had friendships and 
contacts with other fi  rst-generation Pentecostal leaders. 
Frodsham had been baptized in the Spirit since 1908

[177] licizing the Pentecostal message, he also had friendships and 
contacts with other fi  rst-generation Pentecostal leaders. 
Frodsham had been baptized in the Spirit since 1908 
when he visited the (Anglican) All Saints Church pastored by Alexander A. Boddy in 
Sunderland, England. All Saints had been the scene of Pentecostal revival for over 
a year. But it had been Mrs. Boddy, rather than the pastor, who had laid hands on 
Frodsham. He was kneeling at the exact spot where Smith Wigglesworth had been 
baptized a year earlier, and as she prayed, Frodsham reported, “it seemed as if a thou-
sand strong electric batteries came into my legs, and then a lot more came into my 
vocal organs—and volumes, torrents of tongues, poured from my lips. Thus began a 
full six months of heaven upon earth.”
With his wife, Alice, they moved to the United States. At Welch’s request, they 
attended the 1916 General Council in St. Louis. There Welch chatted with Mary

[178] full six months of heaven upon earth.”
With his wife, Alice, they moved to the United States. At Welch’s request, they 
attended the 1916 General Council in St. Louis. There Welch chatted with Mary 
Arthur from Galena, Kansas, a woman he greatly respected. “Have you been praying 
as I requested you to do for God’s man to be the editor of the Evangel?” he asked. “Yes, 
and every time I pray,” she replied, “the Lord shows me that the man who wrote this 
article is the one He has chosen.” She pointed to an article by Frodsham in a recent 
issue of the Pentecostal Evangel. The Frodsham family then moved to Springfi eld, Mis-
souri. For fi  ve years before assuming the position of senior editor, he worked as the 
Council’s general secretary and missionary secretary in addition to his responsibility 
as assistant editor. 
Like other early Council leaders at the headquarters, the Frodshams had little 
choice but to live frugally; his beginning salary was fi ve dollars per week. Never pur-

[179] as assistant editor. 
Like other early Council leaders at the headquarters, the Frodshams had little 
choice but to live frugally; his beginning salary was fi ve dollars per week. Never pur-
chasing a car, they preferred to walk or take public transportation in order to have 
more money to send to missionaries. 
In 1921 the General Council selected him to be the senior editor and, by virtue of 
that offi  ce, a member of the Executive Presbytery. He was thirty-nine years old. Over 
time, he became a prolifi  c writer. In addition to editorials and articles, he wrote Sunday 
TEACHING THE SAINTS
251
 Stanley H. Frodsham
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[180] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
School quarterlies and papers. Fifteen books came from his pen, including a children’s 
book, The Boomerang and Other Stories (1925), which was serialized in four periodicals 
with a combined circulation of one hundred thousand. He also wrote With Signs Follow-
ing: The Story of the Latter Day Pentecostal Revival (1926), the fi  rst world survey of the Pente-
costal movement. Two others about his friend Smith Wiggles worth became immensely 
popular: Ever Increasing Faith (1924), stories from his ministry, and Apostle of Faith (1948), 
a biography. Along with Alice Reynolds Flower and Carrie Judd Montgomery, he stands 
as one of the most prominent spiritual teachers in the Pentecostal movement. 
As editor, Frodsham exercised charity in responding to the critics of Pentecos-
talism. In 1928, a convention of fundamentalists broadly denounced the  Movement, 
accusing it of fanaticism and unscriptural teachings—“a menace in many churches

[181] talism. In 1928, a convention of fundamentalists broadly denounced the  Movement, 
accusing it of fanaticism and unscriptural teachings—“a menace in many churches 
and a real injury to sane testimony of Fundamental Christians.” Publishing the 
statement in the Pentecostal Evangel, he replied: “Although we Pentecostal people have 
to be without the camp, we cannot afford to be bitter against those who do not see 
as we do.” Rather, “our business is to love these Fundamentalists and to pray, ‘Lord, 
bless them all.’”
252
Boys Plucked from a Life of Crime
A
fter graduating from Eastern Bible [Institute] [now Valley 
Forge Christian College], I began working in Gwinhurst, Del-
aware. My co-worker and I had no funds to rent an apartment for 
us nor to rent a building to use as a church. 
Praise God He answered our prayers with an old bus on a 
large lot! We slept and ate in this cold bus and almost froze in 
the winter. Neighbors brought us tomatoes and we ate tomato

[182] Praise God He answered our prayers with an old bus on a 
large lot! We slept and ate in this cold bus and almost froze in 
the winter. Neighbors brought us tomatoes and we ate tomato 
sandwiches for some weeks. God was with us. One night after 
midnight a loud knock woke us and there was one of the breth-
ren of the Lord with boxes and bags of food.
After canvassing the community, we had many parents con-
sent to send their children to our Sunday school and vacation Bible school. On com-
mencement evening, every seat in the YMCA was ﬁ  lled with children and their parents, 
including the parents of some incorrigible boys who were already at ages 5, 6, and 7 
stealing, smoking and cursing. The parents asked us, “How did you do it?” It was worth 
all the efforts we put forth.
Though we were very tired from working with these children, and from walking 
long distances, neither the weariness nor the cold bothered us because Jesus blessed.

[183] all the efforts we put forth.
Though we were very tired from working with these children, and from walking 
long distances, neither the weariness nor the cold bothered us because Jesus blessed. 
Children were being saved, and mothers were being touched by God’s Spirit. I can say 
without hesitancy those days were our happiest, despite the hardships.
A few years ago, I saw in the Pentecostal Evangel one of our “boys” now minister-
ing as a missionary in a foreign country. Only eternity will tell how many of the children 
to whom we ministered were plucked from a life of crime and drugs. Praise be to God!
—Philomena M. Trocine, Reﬂ  ections of Faith (1992), 74–75.
Philomena M. Trocine
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[184] At sixty-seven Frodsham was still spiritually alert to and eager for the moving of 
God’s Spirit. His daughter described him as “a man of intense passion for the super-
natural” and “always eager to attend services where people were praying and being 
brought into vital contact with the Lord.” Such a disposition led him to identify with 
a move that would become known as the New Order of the Latter Rain. At the same 
time, he was aware of his visibility and identifi  cation with the Assemblies of God, 
which the new move was challenging. In good conscience he could not be identifi ed 
with both. So on November 5, 1949, after almost thirty years as the editor of the Pente-
costal Evangel, Stanley Frodsham offered his letter of resignation, which was reluctantly 
accepted by the executive brethren. Not only did the new movement affect him, it 
would soon impact the spiritual identity of the Assemblies of God itself (as a later 
chapter will recount). 
RECOMMENDED READING

[185] would soon impact the spiritual identity of the Assemblies of God itself (as a later 
chapter will recount). 
RECOMMENDED READING
Burke, Bob and Viola Holder. The Whole Gospel for the Whole World: The Life of P. C. Nelson. Okla-
homa City, OK: Commonwealth Press, 2008.
Campbell, Faith. Stanley Frodsham: Prophet with a Pen. Springfi  eld, Mo.: Gospel Publishing 
House, 1974.
Evans, William I. “The Standards of the C. B. I.” Pentecostal Evangel (9 April 1930): 8.
Kendrick, Klaude. “A Pioneer Pentecostal Educator.” Assemblies of God Heritage 2 (spring 1982): 
2, 4.
Lee, Sylvia. “Sunday School Conventions—A Quest for Quality.” Assemblies of God Heritage 12 
(summer 1992): 15–19.
———. “Marcus L. Grable: ‘Mr. Sunday School’ for the Assemblies of God.” Assemblies of God 
Heritage 21 (winter 2001–2002): 4–7, 10–11.
Nelson, P . C. Autobiography of P. C. Nelson. Unpublished ms., 1928.
Pearlman, Irene P . Myer Pearlman and His Friends. Springfi  eld, Mo.: By the author, 1953.

[186] Nelson, P . C. Autobiography of P. C. Nelson. Unpublished ms., 1928.
Pearlman, Irene P . Myer Pearlman and His Friends. Springfi  eld, Mo.: By the author, 1953.
Spittler, Russell P . “Theological Style Among Pentecostals and Charismatics.” In Doing Theology 
in Today’s World, edited by John D. Woodbridge and Thomas Edward McComiskey, 291–318. 
Grand Rapids: Zondervan Publishing House, 1991.
Wilson, Mary Campbell. The Obedience of Faith: The Story of Rev. Christine A. Gibson, Founder of Zion 
Bible Institute. Tulsa: Victory House, 1993.
TEACHING THE SAINTS
253
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[187] EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[188] 255
I
n Christian history, certain teachers have stood out for their spiritual wisdom. 
Although some have been teachers in the formal sense of classroom instruction, 
all have been identifi  ed as people of prayer and valued for their insights into 
the divine dimension of Christian living. They have received respect not because of 
human selection or their own theoretical knowledge, but on the basis of what they 
have personally “seen and tasted.” In a true sense, they function as theologians, not 
in the modern academic sense, but as a result of time spent in the school of prayer.
John Wright Follette, an Assemblies of God minister and one of the best-known 
spiritual teachers in early Pentecostalism, aptly expressed such passion in his poem 
“Breath of God:”
O Breath of God, I need Thee so!
Apart from Thee I cannot live.
I seek no other life to know
But that which Thou alone canst give.
In me no goodly thing I fi nd,
I sink in utter helplessness.
By Thee I live, O Breath divine—

[189] Apart from Thee I cannot live.
I seek no other life to know
But that which Thou alone canst give.
In me no goodly thing I fi nd,
I sink in utter helplessness.
By Thee I live, O Breath divine—
So full of life and blessedness.
And if the embers of my love
Should smolder in the ashes gray,
And only in my memory
Should burn the love of yesterday,
Come, Holy Breath, and breathe once more
Upon this fainting heart of mine
Until it bursts into a fl ame
To burn for Thee with love divine.
In Methodism and the broader holiness movement, leaders such as John Wesley, 
Phoebe Palmer, William E. Boardman, Hannah Whitall Smith, A. B. Simpson, Andrew 
Murray, as well as the Christian Brethren philanthropist George Müller, inspired the 
CHAPTER 15 
SPIRITUAL 
MENTORS
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[190] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
faithful to seek to become more Christlike. Pentecostalism, built in large part on their 
foundational work, has also produced remarkable spiritual mentors. They have mod-
eled the faith life in one way or another, offered guidance on the ministry of the gifts 
of the Spirit, and taught believers how to pray and sense the moving of the Holy Spirit 
in worship. Joseph and Helen Wannenmacher pastored for decades in Milwaukee, 
but their ministry extended far beyond the city limits. Zelma Argue and Charles S. 
Price each traveled as evangelists across North America. Robert Cummings served for 
many years as a missionary to India and as a teacher at Central Bible Institute (CBI). 
Known for her teachings on the “deeper life,” evangelist Hattie Hammond became 
one of the most prominent speakers in the Pentecostal movement. 
Since mentoring in Pentecostal spirituality can hardly be separated from worship

[191] one of the most prominent speakers in the Pentecostal movement. 
Since mentoring in Pentecostal spirituality can hardly be separated from worship 
in music, Herbert Buffum, the itinerant composer of ten thousand gospel songs, has 
been included. Finally, the chapter ends with W. I. Evans, the revered dean of Bethel 
Bible Training School and CBI.
JOSEPH (1895–1989) AND 
HELEN WANNENMACHER (1890–1985)
At the conclusion of a Sunday morning sermon at First Assembly of God in Elyria, 
Ohio, in the fall of 1954, Pastor Robert Graber began preparing to serve Commu-
nion to the congregation. Because Pentecostals 
believe the atonement of Christ provides both 
spiritual and physical healing, they have often 
prayed for the sick when celebrating the Lord’s 
Supper. Graber then recounted a story of healing 
that his father-in-law, Joseph P . Wannenmacher, 
had shared with him.
Wannenmacher had been born into a Ger-
man Catholic family in Hungary in 1895. As a

[192] that his father-in-law, Joseph P . Wannenmacher, 
had shared with him.
Wannenmacher had been born into a Ger-
man Catholic family in Hungary in 1895. As a 
teenager, the family left for the United States 
and settled in Milwaukee, Wisconsin. For a time, 
he worked as an apprentice mechanic and later 
as a foreman in a tool shop. A diseased foot, 
two operations, and the remaining possibility of 
amputation forced him to change professions. A 
skilled violinist, he began to play in restaurants, 
theaters, and concert halls to make a living.
A friend suggested that he seek healing through the assistance of a Christian 
Science practitioner. But instead of improvement, his condition became worse. 
Fortunately, he began to read a Bible that someone had given the family. In 1917, 
the Wannenmacher family learned about a church that preached “Jesus Christ was 
the living Saviour and the healer of men today—in this present day and age.” Vis-

[193] the Wannenmacher family learned about a church that preached “Jesus Christ was 
the living Saviour and the healer of men today—in this present day and age.” Vis-
iting the German Pentecostal mission, he responded immediately when the pastor, 
256
 Joseph and Helen Wannenmacher
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[194] SPIRITUAL MENTORS
257
Pastoring Elder Bates
I
t was my joy to pastor Elder Bates in the last 
years of his life. While he was able to drive, 
I could always count on him driving his Chrysler 
Imperial (“the only car worth driving”) down to 
the church to pray over his pastor (“pastah”). 
He would lay his big hands on my head and 
call on God for the Holy Ghost anointing on 
his pastah. He was a very tall and lean man. 
He liked to refer to his height as 5 feet and 18 
inches tall.
His deep concern for the welfare of the 
ministers of our fellowship prompted him to 
start Christian Fidelity Insurance Company. 
He served as the president for many years and the company prospered and 
blessed many of our Assemblies of God ministers and churches through insur-
ance and church loans.
When physical weakness overcame him and he was hospitalized, he 
called for me to come and discuss his funeral with him. He had asked me to

[195] ance and church loans.
When physical weakness overcame him and he was hospitalized, he 
called for me to come and discuss his funeral with him. He had asked me to 
bring Pete Pulley, one of our ministers and musicians. He gave Brother Pete 
a chorus he wanted sung. Pete asked what he wanted after that. Elder Bates 
said, “Pete, if you don’t know what to do after you sing that song, just sit 
down.” Then he instructed me with great earnestness: “Don’t let them put 
on a dead funeral for me; I want a celebration! If you don’t have a glorious 
celebration, I will come back and do it myself.” The Southwestern Assemblies 
of God College (now University) Chapel was full and I assured them he meant 
business about his funeral. He no doubt was proud, for we had a celebration, 
not a dead funeral.
Over 60 years ago, A.C. Bates started the Southwestern Prayer and Bible 
Conference, which continues today without a break. Elder Bates was con-

[196] not a dead funeral.
Over 60 years ago, A.C. Bates started the Southwestern Prayer and Bible 
Conference, which continues today without a break. Elder Bates was con-
cerned to maintain Pentecostal fervor, worship, and Pentecostal doctrines and 
practices. This meeting was designed to promote the apostolic and prophetic 
gifts and ministry that gave birth to the Pentecostal Movement. It continues 
today to draw a large attendance from across the nine districts that make up 
the region.
On one occasion, he was preaching in a West Texas town on the court-
house steps when a heckler kept disturbing the meeting. He stopped preach-
ing and asked the crowd to wait a moment for him. Dragging the fella around 
to the other side of the courthouse, he “whipped the tar” out of him. He then 
returned and ﬁ  nished his preaching. I asked him about this story once and he 
just smiled with a measure of delight on his face.
—James K. Bridges

[197] returned and ﬁ  nished his preaching. I asked him about this story once and he 
just smiled with a measure of delight on his face.
—James K. Bridges
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[198] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
Hugo Ulrich, asked: “If there is anyone here who is sick and wishes to be prayed for, 
come to the front.”
“No sooner had I bowed my knees before the Almighty God and His Son Jesus 
Christ—even before the preacher or anyone else could pray with me,” Wannen-
macher remembered, “than the power of God fell upon me in mighty dynamic healing 
streams surging through my entire body.” Two weeks after his conversion and healing, 
he received Holy Spirit baptism.
In 1921, while preparing for ministry at the Zion Faith Homes in Zion City, Illinois, 
he met and married Helen Innes. Her family had moved there twenty years earlier to 
sit under the ministry of John Alexander Dowie. Converted while attending a service 
at one of the Faith Homes, she received Spirit baptism soon afterward. While on her 
way to another service, God assured her that he had a greater blessing for her. “After it 
was over I was aware that I still had not received all that He had for me,” she remem-

[199] way to another service, God assured her that he had a greater blessing for her. “After it 
was over I was aware that I still had not received all that He had for me,” she remem-
bered. “So while others visited in the vestibule, I quietly knelt down in an inner room 
by myself. No sooner had my knees touched the fl  oor than the Spirit began fl ooding 
my soul with the glory of the Lord. . . . The power of God was so mightily upon me 
that before I realized it, I was lying prostrate on the fl  oor, with my hands outstretched 
to heaven and at times shaking mightily under its power.” Before long, “such a joy of 
surrender fi  lled my soul that I began to laugh and weep at the same time. . . . At that 
moment I began to speak in other tongues as the Spirit gave utterance. For some 
time I lay praising God in tongues and weeping with tongues of intercession.” Innes 
then ministered in the Faith Homes before helping to pioneer Pentecostal churches

[200] time I lay praising God in tongues and weeping with tongues of intercession.” Innes 
then ministered in the Faith Homes before helping to pioneer Pentecostal churches 
in nearby Waukegan, Illinois, and Kenosha, Wisconsin.
258
How Can We Have a Revival?
W
hen you think that a revival means going out and bringing sinners to the altar, 
you are wrong. You will never be able to drag sinners to the altar over a bunch 
of icebergs. Pentecostal people are the best people in the world but all some of them 
ever do is to warm eighteen inches of a bench, say “Glory” once in a while, and when 
church is over make a dash for home. God’s people need to pray. The doors of the 
house of prayer need to be repaired. The ﬁ  re of God needs to be re-kindled. All that 
deﬁ les must be put away. The saints must fully consecrate themselves. We need to let 
the Holy Ghost work in us as individuals and as a congregation until the beauty of God’s

[201] deﬁ les must be put away. The saints must fully consecrate themselves. We need to let 
the Holy Ghost work in us as individuals and as a congregation until the beauty of God’s 
holiness is manifest. Then the outsider will say, “That is what I have wanted all my life; 
let me get to the altar.”
An old-fashioned Holy Ghost revival starts right behind the pulpit, works out into 
the pews, gets hold of the deacons, Sunday School teachers, and all the church mem-
bers. All the big I’s are erased, and all the little u’s are lifted up. Everyone falls on his 
face, prays through, gets in a good humor with everyone else and gets a new inﬁ  lling 
of the Holy Ghost.
—Aaron A. Wilson, “How Can We Have a Revival?” 
Pentecostal Evangel (September 30, 1939): 1.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[202] Joseph and Helen spent more than sixty years in Milwaukee pastoring Calvary 
Assembly and planting new churches in the city. (They began their ministry by going 
door-to-door offering to pray for anyone in the home who might be sick.) Genu-
inely partners in ministry, their endeavors infl  uenced a broad audience in America 
and Europe. In addition to her role as copastor, Helen became popular as a retreat 
speaker and wrote many articles for Bread of Life magazine. Joseph served as the 
fi rst superintendent of the Hungarian district of the Assemblies of God and also 
assisted Assemblies of God relief efforts in Central and Eastern Europe. Despite all 
of these activities, prayer and keen insights into the ministry and gifts of the Holy 
Spirit marked their ministries.
Graber proceeded to tell the Elyria congregation that on one occasion when 
Wannenmacher was on his way by train to New York City, he felt led of the Lord to

[203] Spirit marked their ministries.
Graber proceeded to tell the Elyria congregation that on one occasion when 
Wannenmacher was on his way by train to New York City, he felt led of the Lord to 
make an unplanned stop in Lorain, Ohio, to visit the home of a Hungarian pastor. A 
conductor assured him that he could still arrive on time by getting on board another 
train that would come two hours later. 
Arriving by taxi at the parsonage, he found the home fi lled with relatives who told 
him that the daughter was gravely ill and near death. “The atmosphere in that house 
was so fi  lled with unbelief and fear, you could have cut it with a knife,” Wannenmacher 
told his son-in-law. He then announced to the family, “I am on my way from Milwaukee 
to New York City. While traveling past Toledo, God told me I should stop in Lorain, 
pray the prayer of faith, and the Lord would heal your daughter.” Leaving the unbeliev-

[204] to New York City. While traveling past Toledo, God told me I should stop in Lorain, 
pray the prayer of faith, and the Lord would heal your daughter.” Leaving the unbeliev-
ing relatives downstairs, he went up to her bedroom where he found twenty-two-year-
old Elizabeth Urban on her deathbed. Surprised to see “Pastor Wannenmacher,” she 
too expressed her belief that she was dying.
While tuning up his violin (he always carried it with him), he told her, “Nonsense, 
honey. If the Lord never wanted to heal you, He would not have told me about your 
illness, and would not have asked me to come and pray the prayer of faith.” As he 
played “What a Friend We Have in Jesus,” the “room was fi  lled with God’s presence, 
and the power of God touched Elizabeth so that she jumped out of bed with the sheet 
wrapped around her.” Before he could anoint her with oil and pray for her, “she was 
instantly healed and strengthened. As she came down the steps, the family thought

[205] wrapped around her.” Before he could anoint her with oil and pray for her, “she was 
instantly healed and strengthened. As she came down the steps, the family thought 
she was out of her mind, but she wanted food.” After lunch together, they drove him 
back to the train station.
When Graber fi  nished telling the story, he stepped out of the pulpit and down 
to the Communion table. As he did, a woman raised her hand. Since he didn’t know 
her, he was reluctant to let her speak and delay the Communion service any longer. 
But when a parishioner next to her nodded in approval, he addressed her by saying, 
“Would you like to say something?” 
She replied, “Yes, Pastor Graber. I am Elizabeth Urban. I am the young woman 
you spoke about. God healed me instantly. I was completely restored to full strength 
and I have not been sick from that day to this. Shortly after my healing I married, 
helped my husband pastor, [and] moved to California.” Not having been back to Ohio 
SPIRITUAL MENTORS

[206] and I have not been sick from that day to this. Shortly after my healing I married, 
helped my husband pastor, [and] moved to California.” Not having been back to Ohio 
SPIRITUAL MENTORS
259
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[207] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
since the healing, she had returned to visit friends from her father’s Hungarian con-
gregation and just happened to visit First Assembly in Elyria with the friend who was 
sitting next to her on that Sunday morning. 
Graber, who had no idea that the woman was still alive or that she was sitting 
in the service, said, “You can imagine the kind of communion we had after that!”
As John Wright Follette said, “In the new creation we are blest with wonderful 
capacity for the deep things of the Spirit and fuller revelations of God. That is why, 
after real prayer for a closer walk and fuller knowledge of Him, He begins uncovering, 
as it were, and digging down into the inner life, to make room and enlarge our powers 
of apprehension and appreciation. There are potential powers for God waiting to be 
released and set free.”
ZELMA ARGUE
(1900–1980)
“When a meeting seemed locked tight, fasting and secret prayer would bring a 
break,” so wrote Zelma Argue.

[208] released and set free.”
ZELMA ARGUE
(1900–1980)
“When a meeting seemed locked tight, fasting and secret prayer would bring a 
break,” so wrote Zelma Argue.
“Souls are not melted to weeping and groaning in anguish 
for their sins” unless believers intercede with God in prayer for 
their conversion. She knew the truth of this from evangelistic 
campaigns across the United States and Canada. At Topeka, 
Kansas, when the expected results were slow in coming, she and 
another female evangelist called the congregation to set aside a 
day of fasting and prayer. She recalled that “hours were spent in 
waiting there upon God, and a spirit of victory seemed to come 
to the praying ones.”
At the close of the next service, while the faithful sang invi-
tation choruses for sinners (“Jesus Is Passing This Way” and 
“What Will Your Answer Be?”), something unusual happened. A woman with both 
arms raised and crying at the top of her voice made her way forward. Her hus-

[209] “What Will Your Answer Be?”), something unusual happened. A woman with both 
arms raised and crying at the top of her voice made her way forward. Her hus-
band soon followed and also confessed his need of salvation. They were new to 
the church and had attended only to pacify their seventeen-year-old son, who had 
repeatedly asked them to accompany him. Argue declared that their conversions 
had “brought a break in that campaign. . . . Our day of prayer was more than repaid, 
and the campaign went forward in real victory.”
Pentecostal evangelists claimed that successful soul winning required prepara-
tion in prayer as well as the ministry of the Holy Spirit. It was far more than an exer-
cise in rational persuasion: The power of the Spirit was expected to break the chains 
of sin that enslaved people and set them free. Such scenes of conviction and deliver-
ance were not uncommon. (The husband found the next day that the mere thought of

[210] of sin that enslaved people and set them free. Such scenes of conviction and deliver-
ance were not uncommon. (The husband found the next day that the mere thought of 
his old smoking habit made him sick to his stomach.)
Argue’s ministry was intertwined with those of other family members. Her 
 father, Andrew H. Argue, a businessman in Winnipeg, Canada, received the 
260
 Zelma Argue 
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[211] baptism in the Holy Spirit at William H. Durham’s North Avenue Mission in Chi-
cago in 1907. This experience led him and his children to become one of the 
best-known Pentecostal families dedicated to evangelism. In 1920, Argue invited 
twenty-year-old Zelma to join his evangelistic party. For sixty years, she traveled 
at different times with her father, her brother, Watson, and her sister, Beulah. 
Sometimes she traveled alone, but always with her trombone (a favorite instru-
ment among Pentecostal preachers).
Her piety, like that of other Pentecostals, centered on “communing with Jesus, 
holding a feast with Him . . . , worshiping Him, loving Him, adoring Him, [being] con-
scious of His presence more strongly than of our surroundings.” Life in the Spirit of 
Christ meant the continual “infl  owing and outfl  owing” of the water of life (John 7:38). 
As long as the believer had her or his eyes on Jesus, taught Argue, the troubled sea

[212] Christ meant the continual “infl  owing and outfl  owing” of the water of life (John 7:38). 
As long as the believer had her or his eyes on Jesus, taught Argue, the troubled sea 
of life would not cause them to sink beneath its waves. And when distractions would 
come and the breaking point was reached, looking upward in trust, she wrote, “We fall 
back on Jesus. . . . Our hearts rise in adoration, in worship.”
Argue remembered the great meetings of Maria B. Woodworth-Etter. There she 
heard the “heavenly chorus” in worship and received her “fi rst vital taste of the real-
ity of spiritual things.” It is somewhat unclear whether the chorus was the congre-
gation’s singing in tongues united with the heavenly choir or miraculously hearing 
heaven’s choir. Nonetheless, she recognized “a beauty, a harmony, beyond that of 
earth.” Watching “Sister Etter” praying, she wondered if she was about to be “trans-
lated before our very eyes.” Sensing the dynamic presence of the Holy Spirit in wor-

[213] earth.” Watching “Sister Etter” praying, she wondered if she was about to be “trans-
lated before our very eyes.” Sensing the dynamic presence of the Holy Spirit in wor-
ship, Argue expressed the sentiments of other Pentecostals when she said: “The veil 
between heaven and earth becomes very thin at such times.” It is easy to see how she 
gained a reputation as otherworldly. Be that as it may, she was known as a powerful 
intercessor.
SPIRITUAL MENTORS
261
Women in Missions
J
esus Christ’s ﬁ  rst coming was revolutionary for all, but especially for women—who 
were for the most part excluded from Jewish ritual. Baptism was open to everyone, 
as was the call to share the Good News. The woman at the well was perhaps the ﬁ  rst 
female missionary to bring a town to Christ. The ﬁ  rst to be given the mission of spread-
ing the news of the resurrection was a woman. And, on the day of Pentecost—tradition-
ally celebrated only by Jewish males—both men and women received the outpouring

[214] ing the news of the resurrection was a woman. And, on the day of Pentecost—tradition-
ally celebrated only by Jewish males—both men and women received the outpouring 
of the Holy Spirit. Peter’s message from Joel 2:28-29, that “sons and daughters” would 
prophesy, has since been the anchor for many women in ministry, particularly for those 
with roots in the holiness movement of the nineteenth century.
—Barbara Cavaness, “God Calling: Women in Assemblies of God Missions,” 
Pneuma: The Journal of the Society for Pentecostal Studies 
(spring 1994): 50–51.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[215] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
CHARLES S. PRICE
(1887–1947)
“Charles, she is calling for sinners,” a Presbyterian minister said as he put his hand 
on the shoulder of Charles S. Price. “She is calling for people who need to be saved.” 
Aimee Semple McPherson had said: “I want every man and woman in this audience 
who will say, ‘Sister, I am a sinner and I need Jesus and I want you to pray for me,’ 
to stand to your feet.” The one-time law student at Oxford University, lecturer on 
the Chautauqua circuit, and now the dis-
tinguished pastor of First Congregational 
Church in Lodi, California, Price stood to 
confess his need of the Savior. His con-
version turned out to be a highlight of 
McPherson’s 1921 campaign in San Jose, 
California.
A native of England, Price had immi-
grated to Canada in search of his fortune 
and peace, for he was a restless soul. 
Sometime after living in British Colum-
bia, he moved to Spokane, Washington. 
There he visited the Life Line Mission, a

[216] and peace, for he was a restless soul. 
Sometime after living in British Colum-
bia, he moved to Spokane, Washington. 
There he visited the Life Line Mission, a 
Free Methodist ministry. Following this, 
he entered the Methodist ministry. 
Reports eventually reached the mis-
sion about the outpouring of the Holy 
Spirit in Los Angeles. Consequently, he 
decided to attend a Pentecostal prayer 
meeting. But on his way, he met a minister 
who invited him to his home. During their 
conversation, his host discouraged him 
from having anything to do with Pentecostals: “Price, I cannot let you go. You will 
wreck your future—your life. You are young and inexperienced. If you take this step 
you will regret it as long as you live.”
As a result, Price did not go and began to study the writings of “modernist” theolo-
gians and to preach on humanitarian concerns. Eventually, his prestige as a preacher 
grew, and he came to enjoy the benefi  ts of pastoring affl  uent congregations. So when

[217] gians and to preach on humanitarian concerns. Eventually, his prestige as a preacher 
grew, and he came to enjoy the benefi  ts of pastoring affl  uent congregations. So when 
an excited parishioner at his church in Lodi returned from the McPherson campaign 
in San Jose, telling him that he had been “saved—saved—through the blood,” Price 
credited the thousands of testimonies of conversion and healing to “mob psychol-
ogy” and “mental and physical reactions.”
Reluctantly, however, he accepted the invitation of a friend to attend. Follow-
ing his experience at the San Jose service and Spirit baptism, his life and ministry 
262
 Charles S. Price
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[218] dramatically changed. After briefl  y traveling with the McPherson party, he started on 
his own in 1922. He held many meetings across the United States, especially in the 
Pacifi c North west, as well as in British Columbia. Miraculous healings highlighted his 
services, and newspapers readily reported such happenings. In 1923, he conducted 
a particularly successful campaign in Vancouver, British Columbia, where the total 
attendance at the civic arena reached 250,000 in three weeks. The Vancouver Daily World
reported: “People in all walks of life, business men, professional men, laborers and 
tradesmen were packed elbow to elbow in the boxes and balconies.”
From Vancouver, the Price evangelistic party went to Edmonton, Alberta. His 
preaching and praying for the sick again attracted large crowds. On one occasion, 
the ice arena that seated twelve thousand was so crowded that “people climbed onto 
the roof and tried to break their way in. They even smashed windows and then threw

[219] the ice arena that seated twelve thousand was so crowded that “people climbed onto 
the roof and tried to break their way in. They even smashed windows and then threw 
money into the arena to pay for the damage they had done.” When he tried to rent 
the building a year later, the city council said it would approve only if Price took out 
an accident insurance policy that covered everyone who attended.
SPIRITUAL MENTORS
263
The Saints Declare
“T
he seraphs are not sitting up nights measuring God’s servants by their salaries.”
—A. G. Ward, early Pentecostal leader
“Cook your sermons in the oven of prayer.”
—Pentecostal Evangel
“Would it not be better if instead of multiplying organizations we could go back 
to God’s simple, original plan—one soul ablaze for God setting another soul on ﬁ re?”
—Alice E. Luce, founder of Latin American Bible Institute (California)
“Whilst on my knees, this Scripture was given, ‘Faith without works is dead’ (James

[220] —Alice E. Luce, founder of Latin American Bible Institute (California)
“Whilst on my knees, this Scripture was given, ‘Faith without works is dead’ (James 
2:20b). . . . I was then shown that my work was to obey the word of God to me—when-
ever it was given, and whatever it required me to do. I got no further light that day, but 
I rose up with a determination to obey God at any cost.”
—Christine A. Gibson, founder of Zion Bible Institute
“Enoch conversed with God. I want to live in constant conversation with God. I am 
so grateful that from my youth up, God has given me a relish for the Bible. I ﬁ  nd the 
Bible food for my soul. It is strength to the believer. It builds up our character in God. 
And as we receive with meekness the Word of God, we are being changed by the Spirit 
from glory to glory. And by this Book comes faith, for faith cometh by hearing, and 
hearing by the Word of God.”
—Smith Wigglesworth, evangelist

[221] from glory to glory. And by this Book comes faith, for faith cometh by hearing, and 
hearing by the Word of God.”
—Smith Wigglesworth, evangelist
“We can be absolutely certain that if we speak as the oracles of God, as we are 
directed to, He will not let any of our words fall to the ground, but will conﬁ  rm them 
with signs following, setting the seal of Heaven on our utterances.”
—Lilian B. Yeomans, M.D., evangelist
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[222] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
At a later campaign in Winnipeg, the Winnipeg Free Press reported that over eight 
thousand jammed the city auditorium on the last night to hear the evangelist. Price 
later recalled, “What the paper did not know was that I had to climb in through the 
kitchen window to get into the building, for the crowd was so great at the door that 
I could not make my way through the throng.” It was not uncommon for one hundred 
to four hundred people to kneel at the altar during a single service. As he continued 
in itinerant evangelism, he often had to construct wooden tabernacles to hold the 
crowds in smaller communities; he thus contributed to Pentecostal church growth in 
the Pacifi c Northwest. 
Besides being a prolifi  c writer, turning out many books, Price also edited the peri-
odical Golden Grain. Although he never held credentials with the Assemblies of God, 
the faithful held his ministry and spiritual writings in high esteem. His most infl uen-

[223] odical Golden Grain. Although he never held credentials with the Assemblies of God, 
the faithful held his ministry and spiritual writings in high esteem. His most infl uen-
tial book may have been The Real Faith, fi  rst published in 1944. In this book, written 
near the end of his life, he shared his frustration over the vast numbers of people who 
left his services not healed. “I have gone home with the faces of poor supplicating 
people haunting me,” he wrote. “I have seen them do their best to rise from the wheel 
chair, only to sink back again in sorrow and disappointment. I have been moved by 
the groans, cries, and intercessions around altars, until they have lingered with me 
for days after the services were over.”
In the unsuccessful quest for healing, most healing evangelists pointed to the 
failure of the seeker. Price’s contemporary Fred F. Bosworth wrote the popular Christ 
the Healer in 1924. Entitled “Why Some Fail to Receive Healing From Christ,” the last

[224] failure of the seeker. Price’s contemporary Fred F. Bosworth wrote the popular Christ 
the Healer in 1924. Entitled “Why Some Fail to Receive Healing From Christ,” the last 
chapter listed twenty-two reasons, ranging from ignorance about the healing power 
of Christ, to unbelief, to demon possession, to poor stewardship of one’s body, to 
unconfessed sin. When all is considered, according to Bosworth, the seeker is at fault 
since God never intends for his children to experience physical suffering. Not surpris-
ingly, the meaning of faith in the Pentecostal tradition has been problematic, leaving 
the saints with gripping questions about the promise of divine healing in the atone-
ment of Christ: Is there any purpose in suffering? Why doesn’t God heal everyone? 
What accounts for people dying, even those of great faith?
In attempting to answer the question of why God doesn’t heal everyone, Price 
took a more positive stance than Bosworth. He suggested that the problem centers

[225] In attempting to answer the question of why God doesn’t heal everyone, Price 
took a more positive stance than Bosworth. He suggested that the problem centers 
on the difference that many believers make between “faith” and “belief”: “To believe in 
healing is one thing; but to have faith for it is altogether something else.” Accordingly, 
“that is why so many needy people, who believe, come to the Lord on the basis of His 
promises in the Word and try and try and try to affi  rm that they are healed.” Here lies 
the diffi  culty: faith has been made a condition of the mind. 
“Real faith,” however, is a gift from God himself, “a divinely imparted grace of the 
heart. . . . Whenever and wherever this faith is in operation,” he declared, “we shall 
no longer be standing around poor, sick folk hour after hour, rebuking, commanding, 
demanding, struggling, and pleading as in the days of yore. There may be a place for

[226] no longer be standing around poor, sick folk hour after hour, rebuking, commanding, 
demanding, struggling, and pleading as in the days of yore. There may be a place for 
intercession, but it is not in the exercise of faith. . . . The full realization—that it was 
264
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[227] not our ability to believe that made the sickness go, but rather that the faith which 
is of God was imparted—will steal over our soul, like a morning daybreak, to bid the 
night shadows fl ee away.”
Price initially brought comfort to the seeker by saying that human strivings for 
the needed gift of faith will not bring healing. Although he struck a delicate balance 
between human effort and divine grace, he only partially resolved the dilemma. 
ROBERT W. CUMMINGS
(1892–1972)
Director of a missionary language school in British India (he had studied twelve 
languages himself), having master’s degrees in theology and oriental missions, a 
Presbyterian army chaplain in World War I, Robert (Bob) W. Cummings was an unlikely 
candidate for missionary appointment with the Assemblies of God. Yet his spiritual 
journey, complicated by mental illness, changed his life and the lives of many others.
The son and grandson of Presbyte-
rian missionaries to India, Cummings and

[228] journey, complicated by mental illness, changed his life and the lives of many others.
The son and grandson of Presbyte-
rian missionaries to India, Cummings and 
his wife, Mildred (“Mid”), began their fi rst 
term of service in India, the land of his 
birth, in 1920. He went there with “many 
modernistic leanings,” but soon realized 
his lack of spiritual power. While seeking 
for the baptism in the Holy Spirit, he also 
came to a new understanding of Calvary. 
As a result, he made a complete surrender 
to God: “My whole being seemed to be so 
purged of sin and selfi  shness that for four 
or fi  ve months there seemed to be nothing 
in me that could respond to temptation.” 
In 1925, both he and Mid were baptized in 
the Spirit and led others into the same experience.
Cummings became interested in the meaning of Christ’s agony in the Garden 
of Gethsemane. This was prompted in part by Muslim objections that Christ had

[229] Cummings became interested in the meaning of Christ’s agony in the Garden 
of Gethsemane. This was prompted in part by Muslim objections that Christ had 
appeared unwilling to do the will of God because he had prayed, “‘Father, if thou be 
willing, remove this cup from me: nevertheless not my will, but thine, be done’” (Luke 
22:42, KJV). (The name of the Muslim faith, Islam, means “submission” [to God’s 
will].) How then could Jesus Christ be divine and bring atonement for the sins of 
humankind? Cummings grappled for answers, but found none that did justice to the 
biblical record. He struggled to understand why Christ initially recoiled from the will 
of His Father: “What did that cup contain to make the Strong Son of God shrink from 
it in sorrow and amazement and horror?” This led him to pray, “God, . . . give me an 
understanding of the agony in the garden, and of the cross, so that I might be able to 
answer the questions of the inquirers.”
SPIRITUAL MENTORS
265

[230] understanding of the agony in the garden, and of the cross, so that I might be able to 
answer the questions of the inquirers.”
SPIRITUAL MENTORS
265
Robert and Mildred Cummings
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[231] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
The doctors said overwork caused his physical and mental breakdown in 1932, 
which required him to leave India. To this could be added the toll on his health taken 
by malaria. Without doubting the truthfulness of these explanations, he also knew 
“that God allowed me to pass through a nervous breakdown, and immediately after 
delivering me, illuminated my mind to picture and understand something of our 
Lord’s experiences in the garden, and their bearing on the nature of redemption’s 
victory.”
Like John of the Cross, a sixteenth-century mystic, Cummings began to expe-
rience the descent into the “dark night of the soul.” For the fi  rst three months, he 
seemed to lose all willpower and “became the prey of the most terribly vile and 
blasphemous evil powers. . . . Horrible and obscene suggestions and imaginations 
poured in an unceasing fl  ood through my consciousness.” Sleep became impossi-

[232] blasphemous evil powers. . . . Horrible and obscene suggestions and imaginations 
poured in an unceasing fl  ood through my consciousness.” Sleep became impossi-
ble without medication. Finally, “I felt as though I had been dragged through the 
sewers of hell.” All of the joys he had experienced in the Holy Spirit had now left 
him.
His worst fears were soon realized: The devil seemed to ask him, “Do you think, 
after the Lord has fi lled you once, and now that I have trapped you and fl ooded your 
soul with all this evil, that the Lord could ever cleanse you and take you back again?” 
Reluctantly, he agreed, believing that he had committed the unpardonable sin; all 
hope had vanished. In the words of John of the Cross, “The soul feels itself to be so 
impure and miserable that it believes God to be against it, and thinks that it has set 
itself up against God . . . that God has cast it away.”
After two years of suffering, which included time spent in New York mental hos-

[233] itself up against God . . . that God has cast it away.”
After two years of suffering, which included time spent in New York mental hos-
pitals, Cummings began to listen and internalize the Scripture promise pressed on 
him by several friends: “I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee” (Hebrews 13:5). For 
the fi  rst time in two years, on October 4, 1934, he fell to his knees and began to pray: 
“‘Lord,’ I said, ‘I am ashamed even to get into an attitude of prayer. I have been so 
resentful. My mind and heart and being have been so fi  lled with things which must be 
more repulsive to Thee than they are to me. I know now that there is no hope for me. 
I don’t believe you could ever take me back. But, Lord, I wonder if I could be wrong? 
You see in what terrible darkness and hopelessness every moment of my experience 
is spent. Lord, if there is anything you can do for me, won’t you do it? I would pray

[234] You see in what terrible darkness and hopelessness every moment of my experience 
is spent. Lord, if there is anything you can do for me, won’t you do it? I would pray 
if I could, but I can’t pray. There are no words to describe what I feel. Anyway, I don’t 
even feel. My heart is like a lump of stone.’”
He remembered that deep in his consciousness “a chorus began to sing.” It was 
line 2 of the song “In Jesus” that suddenly became illuminated with meaning. Written 
by James Procter, a former atheist who became a Christian, it reads:
My soul is night, my heart is steel;
I cannot see, I cannot feel;
For light, for life, I must appeal
In simple faith to Jesus.
266
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[235] Then, “as the last word sang itself out in the silence of my heart, I knew HE stood 
with me. He gathered me in His arms and brought me into a place of nearness that 
I had never known before. His precious blood cleansed away all the stain and sin, all 
the feeling of evil, all the effect of that terrible experience. . . . The fetters snapped and 
I was free. O the unspeakable joy of that deliverance!”
Sometime later, while staying in New York City, Cummings rose early one morn-
ing. “While I was praying,” he recalled, “it seemed as though God took me by the hand 
into the garden of His agony, and showed me His Son there. My mind was astonished 
at what I saw. The Son of God appeared to be crushed. It seemed that He could not 
stand the horror of the thing that confronted Him.” Asking God what could have been 
in the cup that nearly overwhelmed Jesus, the Lord replied, “Do you not remember 
the terror through which you passed during the fi  rst months of your nervous break-

[236] in the cup that nearly overwhelmed Jesus, the Lord replied, “Do you not remember 
the terror through which you passed during the fi  rst months of your nervous break-
down? Do you not remember calling out, ‘O God, it is impossible for me to endure 
another moment of this awful horror’? I was allowing you to taste a little, a very little, 
of the cup that My Son drank to its dregs, the cup of the world’s iniquity and sin.” 
In the early 1940s the Cummingses became affi  liated with the Assemblies of God 
and were invited to join the CBI faculty, Bob as director of missions and Mid as an 
instructor in English and Hindi. 
For the rest of his life and ministry, Cummings shared his insights into Christ’s 
sufferings in Gethsemane. Along with his uncommon discernment in the operation 
of the gifts of the Spirit in worship, his message of Christ as the sin-bearer for the 
redemption of lost humanity left a deep imprint on many Pentecostals, especially his 
students.
HATTIE HAMMOND

[237] of the gifts of the Spirit in worship, his message of Christ as the sin-bearer for the 
redemption of lost humanity left a deep imprint on many Pentecostals, especially his 
students.
HATTIE HAMMOND
(1907–1994)
While Hattie Hammond was speaking 
at a Deeper Life convention in Indianapolis, 
a minister on the platform stood to his feet, 
raised his hands, and with tears rolling down 
his face, cried out: “O God, curse everything 
within me that will not yield to you!” Not only 
were many people converted in her services, 
but thousands went away inspired to com-
pletely consecrate themselves to Christ.
“Ultimately we shall be brought into the 
immediate presence of God,” she said. “But 
how precious is the foretaste now, when we 
can enter in behind the veil into the pres-
ence of God, there to live, there to move, and 
there to abide—living in the heavenlies with 
God, with the Lord Jesus Christ.” Pentecostals 
SPIRITUAL MENTORS
267
 Hattie Hammond

[238] ence of God, there to live, there to move, and 
there to abide—living in the heavenlies with 
God, with the Lord Jesus Christ.” Pentecostals 
SPIRITUAL MENTORS
267
 Hattie Hammond
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[239] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
fl ocked to hear Hammond preach as she traveled across the country from her home 
in Maryland.
Ordained in 1927 at age twenty, her ministry lasted an incredible sixty-seven 
years. Though healed of typhoid fever as a young girl, she had struggled spiritually 
as a teenager until she visited a tent revival sponsored by Bethel Assembly of God in 
Hagerstown, Maryland. While sitting on the back row, she heard the pastor from the 
front of the tent praying, “Ooooh God, Ooooh God.” 
“Every time he would say [this,] it would go through every part of my being. It 
just seemed to feed me somehow, bring something to me. And I said, ‘That’s what 
I want, whatever that man has, that’s what I want.’” Observing her interest, the visiting 
evangelist, John J. Ashcroft, went and sat beside her and prayed with her. Her conver-
sion and Spirit baptism at that meeting changed her life. She began to witness to her

[240] evangelist, John J. Ashcroft, went and sat beside her and prayed with her. Her conver-
sion and Spirit baptism at that meeting changed her life. She began to witness to her 
friends and, at age sixteen, she dedicated her life to full-time ministry.
Ashcroft and his wife began to mentor Hammond and invited her to accompany 
them to Martinsburg, West Virginia, where he was scheduled to preach. By Pente-
costal standards, the services seemed dry and without demonstration of the power 
of God. Finally, before a Saturday evening service, he invited her to preach. While 
the congregation sang, Hammond desperately prayed to receive a message from the 
Lord. He “dropped into her heart” the verse, “O foolish Galatians, who hath bewitched 
you, that ye should not obey the truth [?]” (Galatians 3:1, KJV). 
Stepping to the pulpit, she quoted the verse, paused momentarily, and then 
quoted it again. Without being able to launch into a sermon, she looked at the con-

[241] Stepping to the pulpit, she quoted the verse, paused momentarily, and then 
quoted it again. Without being able to launch into a sermon, she looked at the con-
gregation and said, “Friends, if you get nothing else from this service tonight except 
the word of God, I want you to get the Word of God, so I am going to read this again.” 
After the third reading, a backslidden woman cried out, “O God, have mercy on 
me!” The woman went forward for prayer; her repentance brought a revival that lasted 
for several months.
While still in her twenties, Hammond became one of the best-known spiritual 
mentors in the Pentecostal movement. She eventually spoke in churches of many 
denominations, camp meetings, Bible institutes, Deeper Life conventions in North 
America, and more than thirty countries overseas. In Oakland, California, she told an 
audience that there were seven in her evangelistic party: “Father, Jesus, Angel of the 
Lord, Holy Spirit, Goodness, Mercy, and Self!”
HERBERT BUFFUM

[242] audience that there were seven in her evangelistic party: “Father, Jesus, Angel of the 
Lord, Holy Spirit, Goodness, Mercy, and Self!”
HERBERT BUFFUM
(1879–1939)
His songs were sung by Nazarenes, Baptists, Methodists, Presbyterians, and 
Pentecostals, among others. Upon his death, the Los Angeles Times called him “The 
King of Gospel Song Writers,” saying that “what Stephen Foster did for American 
folklore, Herbert Buffum did for its homely religious sentiments; he expressed it in 
simple musical strains that all could understand.” Although many people having a 
variety of gifts have enriched Pentecostal spirituality, music has always been central. 
268
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[243] Indeed, while others refused 
the use of musical instruments 
in their services in an attempt 
to restore the New Testament 
church (e.g., the noninstrumen-
tal Churches of Christ), Pente-
costal congregations became 
noted for orchestras and skilled 
musicians.
No one denomination can 
claim Herbert Buffum. Both 
Herbert and Lillie had Method-
ist backgrounds and identifi ed 
variously with the Nazarenes, 
Volunteers of America, and the 
Church of God in Christ. Her-
bert never joined the Assem-
blies of God, but Lillie did. 
Yet his was a familiar name 
from the many songbooks 
that carried his more than one 
thousand published compositions. Always on the move—every fi  ve weeks for many 
years—the Buffums sang and preached across the country in churches, camp meet-
ings, and skid row missions. By 1918, their diaries revealed that ten thousand people 
had come to Christ in their services.
Among Buffum’s many songs were “Lift Me Up Above the Shadows,” written

[244] ings, and skid row missions. By 1918, their diaries revealed that ten thousand people 
had come to Christ in their services.
Among Buffum’s many songs were “Lift Me Up Above the Shadows,” written 
after the death of his mother; “I’m Going Thro’, Jesus,” when he had doubts about 
SPIRITUAL MENTORS
269
Demon-Inspired Music
A
rthur Rodzinski, conductor of the New York Philharmonic Orchestra, has made this 
statement: “The style of boogie-woogie which appeals to hep cats is the greatest 
cause of delinquency among American youth today.”
Why is this? It is because there is a strong demon inﬂ  uence, without a doubt, 
behind modern jazz and the jitterbug frenzy which it produces. Musicians have traced 
its origin to the drum-beating, dancing demon worshipers of pagan jungles. An author-
ity declares that to achieve the height of jazz perfection the player must be in a trance 
in which he wanders off into a world of his own. Anyone with spiritual discernment can

[245] ity declares that to achieve the height of jazz perfection the player must be in a trance 
in which he wanders off into a world of his own. Anyone with spiritual discernment can 
sense the demonic power behind it when he hears some of this swing “music” come 
over the radio, and it is little wonder that young people who listen to it by the hour drift 
into all kinds of sin.
—“Demon-Inspired Music,” Pentecostal Evangel (May 27, 1944): 12.
Herbert Buffum
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[246] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
continuing in the ministry; and the popular “I’m Going Higher,” after seeing an air-
plane overhead (an uncommon sight in 1923). This last song became popular in 
youth services. The song leader would sometimes have the audience sing the chorus 
of the song seated, then standing, and fi  nally mounted on their chairs (on outings, 
they might stand on picnic tables).
Buffum’s compositions touched the chords of joy and sorrow in the Christian life 
and often reminded believers of their heavenly hope. In many ways, he shaped early 
twentieth-century evangelical and Pentecostal worship patterns. He had no formal 
training in music; nevertheless, his self-instruction and unusual ability enabled him 
to learn virtually any keyboard or stringed instrument.
With enormous powers of concentration, Buffum could write songs (music and 
lyrics) during church services, in hotel lobbies, on trains, and in train stations, even

[247] With enormous powers of concentration, Buffum could write songs (music and 
lyrics) during church services, in hotel lobbies, on trains, and in train stations, even 
while his four children climbed all over him. According to his daughter Lois, only 
one thing could throw off his concentration: singing another song. If no piano was 
available, Buffum would improvise on a table or another piece of furniture and tap 
out the song. He would even invite congregations to get into the act. First, he would 
have them suggest song titles. Writing the suggestions on a chalkboard, he would 
then have them vote on their top choice. Finally, he would compose a matching song 
on the spot.
In Huntington Beach, California, an eleven-year-old girl suggested the title 
“When I Take My Vacation in Heaven.” Although the congregation didn’t choose this 
one, Buffum was intrigued by it. By the next morning, he had composed the song.

[248] “When I Take My Vacation in Heaven.” Although the congregation didn’t choose this 
one, Buffum was intrigued by it. By the next morning, he had composed the song. 
Although he usually sold the rights to a song for fi  ve dollars—just enough for food 
and basic expenses—he sold this one for one hundred dollars; it became immensely 
popular, moving into the secular market.
The life and ministry of Herbert Buffum epitomizes the church’s troubadour, 
those who itinerated with the gospel in song. Their melodies and choruses not only 
enriched worship, they also infl  uenced day-to-day life, leaving a lyric in the heart that 
enabled the believer to maintain a walk of faith. Their legacy of music blessed gener-
ations of people in all walks of life in congregations around the world.
WILLIAM I. EVANS
(1887–1954)
“We looked to him as a champion of our movement in the things of the Spirit 
and of the old paths of Pentecost,” wrote Milton T. Wells on behalf of the faculty of

[249] WILLIAM I. EVANS
(1887–1954)
“We looked to him as a champion of our movement in the things of the Spirit 
and of the old paths of Pentecost,” wrote Milton T. Wells on behalf of the faculty of 
Eastern Bible Institute in Green Lane, Pennsylvania, after hearing of the death of “W. 
I.” Evans. “One of his greatest joys in the eternal world will be to see the stamp of 
the Spirit which under God he left upon so many thousands of lives either directly or 
indirectly.” Few have had a greater formative infl  uence on the Pentecostal spirituality 
of Assemblies of God ministers than “Brother Evans.”
Born in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, to devout Methodist parents, he came to 
Christ at age eleven while kneeling at his mother’s knee in the kitchen of their home. 
270
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[250] After his conversion, however, he became attracted to the 
Christian and Missionary Alliance. Called to the min-
istry, Evans enrolled at A. B. Simpson’s Missionary 
Training Institute in Nyack, New York, in 1906. The 
next year at the Alliance’s convention in Nyack, he 
and many others were baptized in the Spirit and 
spoke in tongues.
Like other Alliance Pentecostals who remained, 
he went on with his ministry of preaching. While pas-
toring in Richmond, Virginia, he also studied for three 
years at the University of Richmond. During this 
time, he met his wife, Hilda Mae Lindberg; 
they were married in 1914. In the same year, 
he left the Alliance due to its rejection of 
the doctrine of tongues as initial evidence. 
After pastoring the Ossining (New York) 
Gospel Assembly, he moved to Newark, 
New Jersey, where he joined the faculty of Bethel Bible Training School. Although 
the board of the independent Bethel Pentecostal Assembly in Newark sponsored the

[251] New Jersey, where he joined the faculty of Bethel Bible Training School. Although 
the board of the independent Bethel Pentecostal Assembly in Newark sponsored the 
school, many of its faculty members and students were members of the Assemblies of 
God. Evans served as principal in the last years of the school’s existence (1923–1929).
SPIRITUAL MENTORS
271
William I. Evans
Had I But One Hour to Live
W
hat in all the realm of life is worthy of attention except the personal constant pres-
ence of the Lord Jesus Christ! Only those things which contribute vitally toward 
seeking Him and discovering new beauties in Him are worth- while. If in this ﬂ  eeting 
ephemeral day called life, we can reach Him in a mighty grasp of faith that brings Him 
intimately near and makes Him supremely real, we have wrung from earthly walking 
the only thing worthy of attention.
To apprehend Him in faith’s close grip, to be apprehended by Him in love’s strong

[252] the only thing worthy of attention.
To apprehend Him in faith’s close grip, to be apprehended by Him in love’s strong 
grasp, to be constrained then in the embrace of His mighty anointing, urged by an 
unquenchable zeal, to rescue others from the night and present them complete in 
God’s salvation, this is the sum of life below.
The heart cries for adjustment to God and His will with a passion that blinds the 
eyes to all human standards and to every admirable achievement or apparent suc-
cess of our brethren. Nothing short of Christ Himself becomes the pattern, nothing less 
than all the fullness of God, abiding, pulsating, motivating, accomplishing, can stay 
the longing or still the crying. The soul chafes at every earthly bond and, awakened to 
a strength hitherto unrealized, presses out in quest of [the most intense] reality and 
highest, holiest, satisfying achievement.
—W. I. Evans, “Had I But One Hour to Live,” 
Pentecostal Evangel (April 26, 1941): 5.

[253] highest, holiest, satisfying achievement.
—W. I. Evans, “Had I But One Hour to Live,” 
Pentecostal Evangel (April 26, 1941): 5.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[254] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
272
The question and answer column for readers of Today’s Pentecostal Evangel ﬁ  rst 
appeared in the January 1, 1916 issue of the Weekly Evangel, during a time of doctrinal 
strife in the Assemblies of God over the correct understanding of the Godhead. Questions 
had to be sincere (“not for controversy”), brief, and about religious matters “that can be 
answered from the Bible and History.” Inquirers were told speciﬁ cally not to ask for the 
interpretation of dreams and visions since “we do not have the gift to interpret these.” 
E. N. Bell provided the answers until his death in 1923; Gospel Publishing House 
then made them available in book form as Questions and Answers. E. S. Williams later 
wrote the columns and his “Your Questions” appeared in 1968. Years later, the column 
resurfaced with Stanley Horton as the writer. It has been a popular means of providing 
spiritual advice for believers.

[255] When Bethel “merged” with CBI (that is, the Evans and Ralph M. Riggs families 
moved to Springfi  eld), he continued his training of Spirit-fi  lled young people. Evans 
is remembered for his life of prayer and keen insight into the moving of the Spirit, 
including the operation of the Spirit’s gifts in worship. 
One of his favorite illustrations, which he shared with freshmen, referred to a trip 
he had taken through Kansas. He had observed that the “wheat stalks yielded even 
to the slightest moving of the air. To him, this was a picture of what should be true 
in a Christian’s life. It should be yielded to God, and so sensitive to Him, that the 
slightest movement of the Spirit would be obeyed.” Evans himself modeled this life 
in the Spirit.
His daily schedule began early with extended prayer, Bible study, and meditation. 
Next, he went to his offi ce to pray with the faculty before the chapel service. He was

[256] in the Spirit.
His daily schedule began early with extended prayer, Bible study, and meditation. 
Next, he went to his offi ce to pray with the faculty before the chapel service. He was 
always there thirty minutes ahead of his colleagues and never looked up as they came 
into the room. However, he sensed that the spiritual atmosphere intensifi  ed as the 
number increased: “As each digit is added, the power is multiplied.”
Prepared now for the morning chapel, the faculty and Dean Evans took their seats 
on the platform. In leading the service, he encouraged times of prayer and “waiting 
before the Lord.” When revival came, he kept things moving in the right direction by 
urging the students to “hold steady.” One student said this “brought many a service 
of victory and blessing.” Hence, when problems arose, he was able to keep the Spirit 
from being “quenched” (1 Thessalonians 5:19, KJV). Evans also understood the mean-

[257] of victory and blessing.” Hence, when problems arose, he was able to keep the Spirit 
from being “quenched” (1 Thessalonians 5:19, KJV). Evans also understood the mean-
ing of “the joy of the Lord.” There were times of Pentecostal blessing when he would 
begin to “laugh in the Spirit.” Students recalled how the chapel reverberated with his 
hearty laugh. 
For W. I. Evans, affectionately known as “Pop” Evans, holiness and spirituality 
went hand in hand. Those who claim Spirit baptism but haven’t submitted their wills 
and ambitions to Christ will never have “a Holy Ghost ministry.” 
“You may have a spurt here and there,” he wrote, “like the shooting off of a fi  re-
cracker, or the detonating of a skyrocket, but it will fi  zzle out and come down with a 
thud. Holy Ghost ministry is by Christ’s Lordship.
RECOMMENDED READING
Argue, Zelma. Contending for the Faith. 2d rev. ed. Winnipeg: Messenger of God Publishing 
House, 1928.

[258] thud. Holy Ghost ministry is by Christ’s Lordship.
RECOMMENDED READING
Argue, Zelma. Contending for the Faith. 2d rev. ed. Winnipeg: Messenger of God Publishing 
House, 1928.
———. Garments of Strength. Springfi  eld, Mo.: Gospel Publishing House, 1935.
Blumhofer, Edith L. “Life on Faith Lines: Early Homes and Early Pentecostal Values.” Parts 1 
and 2. Assemblies of God Heritage 10 (summer 1990): 10–12, 22; 10 (fall 1990): 5–7, 21–22.
Craig, Marion. Prepared by God: Robert Cummings. Springfi  eld, Mo.: Foreign Missions 
Department, n.d.
Cummings, Robert W. Gethsemane. Springfi  eld, Mo.: By the author, 1944.
———. Unto You Is the Promise. Springfi  eld, Mo.: Gospel Publishing House, n.d.
SPIRITUAL MENTORS
273
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[259] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
Enloe, Tim. “Dr. Charles S. Price: His Life, Ministry and Infl uence.” Assemblies of God Heritage 28 
(2008): 4–13.
Evans, Paul A. Letters from “Pop” Evans. Springfi  eld, Mo.: Central Bible College Alumni Associa-
tion, 1973.
Evans, W. I. This River Must Flow! Springfi  eld, Mo.: Gospel Publishing House, 1954. 
Follette, John Wright. Arrows of Truth. Springfi  eld, Mo.: Gospel Publishing House, 1969. 
Gohr, Glenn. “Two Pioneers of Pentecost in Milwaukee: Joseph and Helen Wannenmacher.” 
 Assemblies of God Heritage 9 (spring 1989): 11–12, 20. 
Hammond, Hattie. “Christ Bringing Us to God.” Pentecostal Evangel (24 April 1937): 2–3.
Price, Charles S. The Real Faith. 1940. Reprint, Plainfi  eld, N.J.: Logos International, 1972.
———. The Story of My Life. Pasadena, Calif.: By the author, 1935.
Shearer, Sheryl. “Zelma E. Argue: Handmaiden of the Lord.” Assemblies of God Heritage 22 (spring 
2002): 18–23.

[260] ———. The Story of My Life. Pasadena, Calif.: By the author, 1935.
Shearer, Sheryl. “Zelma E. Argue: Handmaiden of the Lord.” Assemblies of God Heritage 22 (spring 
2002): 18–23.
St. John of the Cross. Dark Night of the Soul. New York: Doubleday, 1990.
Warner, Wayne E. “Herbert Buffum: The King of Gospel Song Writers.” Assemblies of God Heritage 
6 (fall 1986): 11–14, 16.
274
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[261] me to sleep.
Knowing as I did the awful power of the habit-inducing drug to enslave and 
destroy its victims (I am a graduate of the University of Michigan Department of 
Medicine, Ann Arbor, Michigan), I was utterly inexcusable for daring to triﬂ e even 
for a moment with such a destructive agent.
To ask me whether I had taken the drug on any particular day was as need-
less as to inquire whether I had inhaled atmospheric air; one seemed as neces-
sary to my existence as the other.
Do you ask “Did you not pray?” Yes; I came to the place where I did nothing 
else. . . . Night after night I walked up and down our long drawing rooms calling 
on God, and sometimes almost literally tearing the hair out of my head. And you 
say “And you weren’t healed after that?” No; I wasn’t healed because I didn’t 
believe the simple statement of the Word of God; rather, my healing could not be 
manifested, because of my unbelief.

[262] in our lives, conforming our will to His. Thus, our requests in His name are increasingly according to His will, opening the avenue for His responding to our prayers.  The revelation of God as “the Lord, who heals you” (Exodus 15:26) cannot be limited to Israel. The healing of the centurion’s servant and the daughter of the Canaanite woman show that healing is the privilege of Gentiles also. In fact, there is healing for all who desire it and will respond to Jesus. There is evidence that God’s gift of healing can even be experienced by one before their sins have been dealt with, as in the case of the invalid at the Pool of Bethesda (John 5:2–9,14).  Belief in divine healing neither opposes nor competes with medical doctors. The knowledge and skills of this profession bring help to many. It is true that the Bible condemns King Asa because “even in his illness he did not seek help from the Lord, but only from the physicians” (2 Chronicles 16:12). But Asa had already sought for help from

[263] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
things have been happening here. We’ve just concluded a series of special meetings 
with a Holy Spirit emphasis. I was thrilled at the number of people who received the 
Spirit.” Later, when she and her coworker Peggy Johnson were given a mobile clinic 
to reach a broader area, she wrote, “We’ve been moving out into many new places. 
While meeting the physical needs of these people, we’ve seen quite a few souls come 
to the Lord. . . . A number of times when we have done all we could medically, God 
has supernaturally healed very sick bodies. What a thrill to see Him work!”
56
The ultimate goal of HCM remains the conversion of the spiritually lost. Even You 
Can Be Healthy explains how a person can become a Christian. Since her appointment 
as director of international operations in 1994, Butrin has supervised a ministry of 
global proportions that changes the world one patient at a time.
================================================================================

================================================================================
🧠 Query: User: hello
Assistant: Hello! My main purpose here is to answer information questions from the file base. If you have any questions about topics such as healing, the gospel, or the implications of life and death, feel free to ask!
User: tell me what I just asked you
Assistant: Sorry, we do not have enough information to answer your question. If you have any specific questions about topics such as healing, the gospel, or the implications of life and death, feel free to ask!

User: 16 fundamental truths
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
📄 Context Sent to Model:
[1] gifts, and healing without the universality of Spirit baptism 
and tongues. There is a real danger, in the words of Earl Creps, 
of a generation of Assemblies of God “post-Pentecostal Pen-
tecostals” that affi  rm the Statement of Fundamental Truths 
and enjoy relationships, but do not seek to practice or pro-
mote Spirit baptism and speaking in tongues.
General Superintendent Wood disputes this pessimistic 
picture in a 2014 centennial interview in Charisma magazine. 
His observations, interviews with leaders, and wide travel 
affi rm that Spirit baptism with the initial physical evidence of 
tongues is alive and growing. He affi  rmed that the statistics 
are imperfect, not refl  ecting practices in thousands of churches in recent years.
A recent Pew Research study evaluating both American and global Christianity 
notes a signifi cant rise in Pentecostal practices, even among those not tradition-
ally labeled Pentecostal or charismatic. For much the evangelical world in particular,

[2] notes a signifi cant rise in Pentecostal practices, even among those not tradition-
ally labeled Pentecostal or charismatic. For much the evangelical world in particular, 
praying for healing and miracles, exercising spiritual gifts, trusting the Lord for deliv-
erance, and speaking in tongues are all valid biblical practices. This is a signifi  cant 
change within one generation. 
Cessationism (the belief that the manifestations of the Spirit in 1 Corinthians 
12–14 ceased with the death of the original apostles or the close of the New Testa-
ment canon in the fourth century) is a declining movement as believers of all denom-
inations and theological persuasions affi  rm the contemporary work of the Spirit. 
Though many of these groups do not share the “classical” Pentecostal distinctive 
of tongues as the initial physical evident of Spirit baptism, the affi  rmation that the 
Spirit works in and through all the gifts is a heartening change.

[3] of tongues as the initial physical evident of Spirit baptism, the affi  rmation that the 
Spirit works in and through all the gifts is a heartening change. 
There are some signs across the United States that cause concern among 
thoughtful persons. The number of people that answered “none” when asked for reli-
gious affi  liation has grown from a miniscule percentage in the 1980s to 16.1  per-
cent in a 2007 poll by Pew Research. And 28 percent have left the faith they were 
raised in or affi  liate with no religion at all.
1 This refl  ects two trends: (1) the loss of 
denominational loyalty among some that might still (vaguely) identify themselves as 
Christians; and (2) an increasing number of the U.S. population (both immigrant and 
native-born) with no religious affi liation.  
“Post-Christian” and “postmodern” are labels tossed about with great frequency 
in popular analysis. The United States remains much more religious than most of

[4] “Post-Christian” and “postmodern” are labels tossed about with great frequency 
in popular analysis. The United States remains much more religious than most of 
Western Europe; however, “being spiritual and not religious” is gaining as a category 
of a generation without signifi  cant exposure to the gospel. 
The new challenge for Assemblies of God leaders is evangelization of people with 
no Christian memory. This is a new phenomenon for many U.S. leaders (though not 
for the appointed missionaries of AGWM). 
Another concern among thoughtful adherents is moral compromise with the 
subversion of traditional marriage and sexuality in the last half-century. The public 
TOWARD THE CENTENNIAL: TIMES OF TRANSFORMATION
525
Charisma magazine
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:52:40 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[5] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
consensus in the West and the United States of lifelong heterosexual marriage and 
celibacy for singles is no longer the prevailing opinion of popular culture or even 
a majority of people. While strong elements within American society advocate or 
support gay marriage, the Assemblies of God stands fi  rmly committed to scriptural 
teaching that marriage is between a man and a woman.
When confronted by actual or potential compromise in other evangelical or Pen-
tecostal fellowships and organizations, steadfast adherence to biblical marriage is 
quickly affi  rmed. The Assemblies of God leadership has been uncompromising it its 
standards of sexual conduct while affi  rming love for all people broken by sin. 
OPPORTUNITIES AHEAD!
The evangelical revivals of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries fueled the 
birth of global missions. The Pentecostal awakenings have accelerated the spread

[6] OPPORTUNITIES AHEAD!
The evangelical revivals of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries fueled the 
birth of global missions. The Pentecostal awakenings have accelerated the spread 
of the gospel in the twentieth century. We are now witnesses the re-evangelizing of 
Europe and the United States by missional believers from developing nations. The 
gospel is now going from everywhere to everywhere as former missions fi elds become 
missions-sending agencies. 
When Melvin Hodges penned The Indigenous Church in 1953, the aim of missions was 
a self-sustaining local church and, in the long-term, a self-sustaining national fellow-
ship. These remain important goals; however, a more complete goal is emerging in the 
twenty-fi rst century: establishing churches and fellowships of churches that become 
not only self-sustaining, but missionary sending. Fresh voices such as Ivan Satyavrata, 
Wonsuk and Julie Ma, DeLonn Rance, and others are helping AG adherents around

[7] not only self-sustaining, but missionary sending. Fresh voices such as Ivan Satyavrata, 
Wonsuk and Julie Ma, DeLonn Rance, and others are helping AG adherents around 
the world answer the Great Commission call and become “360  Churches.” Mission-
ary-scholars such as Alan Johnson in Thailand are now articulating an integration of 
apostolic pioneering and church planting united with holistic care for communities. 
In the post-Christian West, Pentecostal spirituality and theology are the answer 
for generations that are hungry for experience and meaning rooted in love and truth. 
Apologetics and careful explanations of truth must be united with the proclamation 
of the Cross and power of the Spirit to deliver, heal, forgive, redeem, and transform. 
Now is not the time to lessen Pentecostal emphases. The exact opposite is true. The 
signs and wonders demonstrated in Scripture are alive and well on the frontiers of

[8] Now is not the time to lessen Pentecostal emphases. The exact opposite is true. The 
signs and wonders demonstrated in Scripture are alive and well on the frontiers of 
evangelization and missions today. The Assemblies of God has a bright future as we 
recognize those frontiers across the street and around the world.
Gary McGee’s fi nal work, Miracles, Missions and American Pentecostalism (2010), details 
the supernatural confi rmation of the missionary pioneers. As a new Spirit-empowered 
generation hears the call to evangelism, worship, discipleship, and compassion, they 
can expect the Lord of the harvest to again confi  rm the message of grace.
ENDNOTE
 1 “Religious Landscape Survey, Report 1: Religious Affi  liation,” Pew Research Center’s 
Religion & Public Life Project, 2013, http://religions.pewforum.org/reports.
526
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:52:40 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[9] 527
T
he Bible is our all–suffi  cient rule for faith and practice. This Statement of Fun-
damental Truths is intended simply as a basis of fellowship among us (i.e., that 
we all speak the same thing, 1 Corinthians 1:10; Acts 2:42). The phraseology 
employed in this statement is not inspired or contended for, but the truth set forth 
is held to be essential to a full–gospel ministry. No claim is made that it contains all 
biblical truth, only that it covers our need as to these fundamental doctrines.
1. THE SCRIPTURES INSPIRED
The Scriptures, both the Old and New Testaments, are verbally inspired of God 
and are the revelation of God to man, the infallible, authoritative rule of faith and 
conduct (2 Timothy 3:15–17; 1 Thessalonians 2:13; 2 Peter 1:21).
2. THE ONE TRUE GOD
The one true God has revealed himself as the eternally self–existent “I AM,” the 
Creator of heaven and earth and the Redeemer of mankind. He has further revealed

[10] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
relationship, as to its mode is inscrutable and incomprehensible, because unexplained 
(Luke 1:35; 1 Corinthians 1:24; Matthew 11:25–27; 28:19; 2 Corinthians 13:14; 1 John 1:3,4).
(c) Unity of the One Being of Father, Son, and Holy Spirit
Accordingly, therefore, there is that in the Father which constitutes Him the Father 
and not the Son; there is that in the Son which constitutes Him the Son and not the 
Father; and there is that in the Holy Spirit which constitutes Him the Holy Spirit and 
not either the Father or the Son. Wherefore, the Father is the Begetter; the Son is the 
Begotten; and the Holy Spirit is the One proceeding from the Father and the Son. There-
fore, because these three persons in the godhead are in a state of unity, there is but 
one Lord God Almighty and His name one (John 1:18; 15:26; 17:11,21; Zechariah 14:9).
(d) Identity and Cooperation in the Godhead
The Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit are never identical as to person; nor

[11] (d) Identity and Cooperation in the Godhead
The Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit are never identical as to person; nor 
confused as to relation; nor divided in respect to the godhead; nor opposed as to 
cooperation. The Son is in the Father and the Father is in the Son as to relationship. 
The Son is with the Father and the Father is with the Son, as to fellowship. The Father 
is not from the Son, but the Son is from the Father, as to authority. The Holy Spirit 
is from the Father and the Son proceeding, as to nature, relationship, cooperation, 
and authority. Hence, no person in the godhead either exists or works separately or 
independently of the others (John 5:17–30,32,37; 8:17,18).
(e) The Title, Lord Jesus Christ
The appellation Lord Jesus Christ, is a proper name. It is never applied in the New 
Testament either to the Father or to the Holy Spirit. It therefore belongs exclusively 
to the Son of God (Romans 1:1–3,7; 2 John 3).
(f) The Lord Jesus Christ, God With Us

[12] Testament either to the Father or to the Holy Spirit. It therefore belongs exclusively 
to the Son of God (Romans 1:1–3,7; 2 John 3).
(f) The Lord Jesus Christ, God With Us
The Lord Jesus Christ, as to His divine and eternal nature, is the proper and only 
Begotten of the Father, but as to His human nature, He is the proper Son of Man. He 
is, therefore, acknowledged to be both God and man; who because He is God and 
man, is “Immanuel,” God with us (Matthew 1:23; 1 John 4:2,10,14; Revelation 1:13,17).
(g) The Title, Son of God
Since the name Immanuel embraces both God and man, in the one person, our 
Lord Jesus Christ, it follows that the title Son of God describes His proper deity, and 
the title Son of Man, His proper humanity. Therefore, the title Son of God belongs to 
the order of eternity, and the title Son of Man to the order of time (Matthew 1:21–23; 
2 John 3; 1 John 3:8; Hebrews 7:3; 1:1–13).
(h) Transgression of the Doctrine of Christ

[13] the order of eternity, and the title Son of Man to the order of time (Matthew 1:21–23; 
2 John 3; 1 John 3:8; Hebrews 7:3; 1:1–13).
(h) Transgression of the Doctrine of Christ
Wherefore, it is a transgression of the doctrine of Christ to say that Jesus Christ 
derived the title Son of God solely from the fact of the Incarnation, or because of His 
relation to the economy of redemption. Therefore, to deny that the Father is a real 
and eternal Father, and that the Son is a real and eternal Son, is a denial of the 
528
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:52:40 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[14] a. His virgin birth (Matthew 1:23; Luke 1:31,35). 
b. His sinless life (Hebrews 7:26; 1 Peter 2:22).
c. His miracles (Acts 2:22; 10:38).
d. His substitutionary work on the cross (1 Corinthians 15:3; 2 Corinthians 5:21).
e. His bodily resurrection from the dead (Matthew 28:6; Luke 24:39; 1 Corinthians 
15:4).
f. His exaltation to the right hand of God (Acts 1:9,11; 2:33; Philippians 2:9–11; 
Hebrews 1:3).
4. THE FALL OF MAN
Man was created good and upright; for God said, “Let us make man in our 
image, after our likeness.” However, man by voluntary transgression fell and thereby 
incurred not only physical death but also spiritual death, which is separation from 
God (Genesis 1:26,27; 2:17; 3:6; Romans 5:12–19).
5. THE SALVATION OF MAN
Man’s only hope of redemption is through the shed blood of Jesus Christ the Son 
of God.
APPENDIX 1: STATEMENT OF FUNDAMENTAL TRUTHS  
529

[15] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
530
a. Conditions to Salvation
Salvation is received through repentance toward God and faith toward the Lord 
Jesus Christ. By the washing of regeneration and renewing of the Holy Spirit, being 
justifi ed by grace through faith, man becomes an heir of God according to the hope of 
eternal life (Luke 24:47; John 3:3; Romans 10:13–15; Ephesians 2:8; Titus 2:11; 3:5–7).
b. The Evidences of Salvation
The inward evidence of salvation is the direct witness of the Spirit (Romans 8:16). 
The outward evidence to all men is a life of righteousness and true holiness (Ephe-
sians 4:24; Titus 2:12).
 6. THE ORDINANCES OF THE CHURCH
a. Baptism in Water
The ordinance of baptism by immersion is commanded in the Scriptures. All who 
repent and believe on Christ as Savior and Lord are to be baptized. Thus they declare 
to the world that they have died with Christ and that they also have been raised with

[16] repent and believe on Christ as Savior and Lord are to be baptized. Thus they declare 
to the world that they have died with Christ and that they also have been raised with 
Him to walk in newness of life (Matthew 28:19; Mark 16:16; Acts 10:47,48; Romans 6:4).
b. Holy Communion
The Lord’s Supper, consisting of the elements—bread and the fruit of the vine—is 
the symbol expressing our sharing the divine nature of our Lord Jesus Christ (2 Peter 
1:4); a memorial of His suffering and death (1 Corinthians 11:26); and a prophecy of His 
second coming (1 Corinthians 11:26); and is enjoined on all believers “till He come!”
7. THE BAPTISM IN THE HOLY SPIRIT
All believers are entitled to and should ardently expect and earnestly seek the 
promise of the Father, the baptism in the Holy Spirit and fi  re, according to the com-
mand of our Lord Jesus Christ. This was the normal experience of all in the early 
Christian church. With it comes the enduement of power for life and service, the

[17] mand of our Lord Jesus Christ. This was the normal experience of all in the early 
Christian church. With it comes the enduement of power for life and service, the 
bestowment of the gifts and their uses in the work of the ministry (Luke 24:49; Acts 
1:4,8; 1 Corinthians 12:1–31). This experience is distinct from and subsequent to the 
experience of the new birth (Acts 8:12–17; 10:44–46; 11:14–16; 15:7–9). With the bap-
tism in the Holy Spirit come such experiences as an overfl  owing fullness of the Spirit 
(John 7:37–39; Acts 4:8), a deepened reverence for God (Acts 2:43; Hebrews 12:28), an 
intensifi ed consecration to God and dedication to His work (Acts 2:42), and a more 
active love for Christ, for His Word, and for the lost (Mark 16:20).
8. THE INITIAL PHYSICAL EVIDENCE OF THE BAPTISM IN THE HOLY SPIRIT
The baptism of believers in the Holy Spirit is witnessed by the initial physical 
sign of speaking with other tongues as the Spirit of God gives them utterance (Acts

[18] The baptism of believers in the Holy Spirit is witnessed by the initial physical 
sign of speaking with other tongues as the Spirit of God gives them utterance (Acts 
2:4). The speaking in tongues in this instance is the same in essence as the gift of 
tongues (1 Corinthians 12:4–10,28), but different in purpose and use.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:52:40 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[19] APPENDIX 1: STATEMENT OF FUNDAMENTAL TRUTHS  
531
9. SANCTIFICATION
Sanctifi cation is an act of separation from that which is evil, and of dedication 
unto God (Romans 12:1,2; 1 Thessalonians 5:23; Hebrews 13:12). Scriptures teach a 
life of “holiness without which no man shall see the Lord” (Hebrews 12:14). By the 
power of the Holy Spirit we are able to obey the command: “Be ye holy, for I am holy” 
(1 Peter 1:15,16).
Sanctifi cation is realized in the believer by recognizing his identifi  cation with 
Christ in His death and resurrection, and by faith reckoning daily upon the fact of that 
union, and by offering every faculty continually to the dominion of the Holy Spirit 
(Romans 6:1–11,13; 8:1,2,13; Galatians 2:20; Philippians 2:12,13; 1 Peter 1:5).
10. THE CHURCH AND ITS MISSION
The Church is the body of Christ, the habitation of God through the Spirit, with 
divine appointments for the fulfi  llment of her Great Commission. Each believer, born

[20] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
532
11. THE MINISTRY
A divinely called and scripturally ordained ministry has been provided by our Lord 
for the fourfold purpose of leading the Church in: (1) evangelization of the world (Mark 
16:15–20), (2) worship of God (John 4:23,24), (3) building a Body of saints being per-
fected in the image of His Son (Ephesians 4:11,16), and (4) meeting human need with 
ministries of love and compassion (Psalm 112:9; Galatians 2:10; 6:10; James 1:27).
12. DIVINE HEALING
Divine healing is an integral part of the gospel. Deliverance from sickness is pro-
vided for in the Atonement, and is the privilege of all believers (Isaiah 53:4,5; Mat-
thew 8:16,17; James 5:14–16).
13. THE BLESSED HOPE
The resurrection of those who have fallen asleep in Christ and their translation 
together with those who are alive and remain unto the coming of the Lord is the 
imminent and blessed hope of the Church (1 Thessalonians 4:16,17; Romans 8:23; 
Titus 2:13; 1 Corinthians 15:51,52).

[21] together with those who are alive and remain unto the coming of the Lord is the 
imminent and blessed hope of the Church (1 Thessalonians 4:16,17; Romans 8:23; 
Titus 2:13; 1 Corinthians 15:51,52).
14. THE MILLENNIAL REIGN OF CHRIST
The second coming of Christ includes the rapture of the saints, which is our 
blessed hope, followed by the visible return of Christ with His saints to reign on 
the earth for one thousand years (Zechariah 14:5; Matthew 24:27,30; Revelation 1:7; 
19:11–14; 20:1–6). This millennial reign will bring the salvation of national Israel (Eze-
kiel 37:21,22; Zephaniah 3:19,20; Romans 11:26,27) and the establishment of univer-
sal peace (Isaiah 11:6–9; Psalm 72:3–8; Micah 4:3,4).
15. THE FINAL JUDGMENT
There will be a fi  nal judgment in which the wicked dead will be raised and judged 
according to their works. Whosoever is not found written in the Book of Life, together 
with the devil and his angels, the beast and the false prophet, will be consigned to

[22] according to their works. Whosoever is not found written in the Book of Life, together 
with the devil and his angels, the beast and the false prophet, will be consigned to 
everlasting punishment in the lake which burneth with fi  re and brimstone, which is 
the second death (Matthew 25:46; Mark 9:43–48; Revelation 19:20; 20:11–15; 21:8).
16. THE NEW HEAVENS AND THE NEW EARTH
“We, according to His promise, look for new heavens and a new earth, wherein 
dwelleth righteousness” (2 Peter 3:13; Revelation 21,22).
Scripture quotations are from the King James Version of the Holy Bible.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:52:40 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[23] 533
1.  HOT SPRINGS, ARKANSAS 
APRIL 2–12, 1914
Chairman: E. N. Bell 
Secretary: J. Roswell Flower
2.  CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOVEMBER 15–29, 1914
Chairman: Arch P . Collins 
Assistant Chairman: Daniel C. O. 
Opperman 
Secretary: J. Roswell Flower
Assistant Secretary: Bennett F. Lawrence
3.  ST. LOUIS, MISSOURI
OCTOBER 1–10, 1915
Chairman: John W. Welch 
Secretary: J. Roswell Flower
4.  ST. LOUIS, MISSOURI
OCTOBER 1–7, 1916
Chairman: John W. Welch 
Secretary: Stanley H. Frodsham
5.  ST. LOUIS, MISSOURI
SEPTEMBER 9–14, 1917
Chairman: John W. Welch 
Secretary: Stanley H. Frodsham
6.  SPRINGFIELD, MISSOURI
SEPTEMBER 4–11, 1918
Chairman: John W. Welch 
Secretary: Stanley H. Frodsham
7.  CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
SEPTEMBER 25–30, 1919
Chairman: John W. Welch 
Secretary and Editor: E. N. Bell
Foreign Missions Secretary: 
J. Roswell Flower
8.  SPRINGFIELD, MISSOURI
SEPTEMBER 21–27, 1920
Chairman: E. N. Bell 
Secretary: John W. Welch 
Foreign Missions Secretary: 
J. Roswell Flower
Editor: John T. Boddy

[24] J. Roswell Flower
8.  SPRINGFIELD, MISSOURI
SEPTEMBER 21–27, 1920
Chairman: E. N. Bell 
Secretary: John W. Welch 
Foreign Missions Secretary: 
J. Roswell Flower
Editor: John T. Boddy
9.  ST. LOUIS, MISSOURI
SEPTEMBER 21–28, 1921
Chairman: E. N. Bell 
Secretary: John W. Welch
Foreign Missions Secretary: 
J. Roswell Flower
Editor: Stanley H. Frodsham
APPENDIX 2 
OFFICERS OF 
THE GENERAL COUNCIL
1914–2013
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:52:40 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[25] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
continuing in the ministry; and the popular “I’m Going Higher,” after seeing an air-
plane overhead (an uncommon sight in 1923). This last song became popular in 
youth services. The song leader would sometimes have the audience sing the chorus 
of the song seated, then standing, and fi  nally mounted on their chairs (on outings, 
they might stand on picnic tables).
Buffum’s compositions touched the chords of joy and sorrow in the Christian life 
and often reminded believers of their heavenly hope. In many ways, he shaped early 
twentieth-century evangelical and Pentecostal worship patterns. He had no formal 
training in music; nevertheless, his self-instruction and unusual ability enabled him 
to learn virtually any keyboard or stringed instrument.
With enormous powers of concentration, Buffum could write songs (music and 
lyrics) during church services, in hotel lobbies, on trains, and in train stations, even

[26] With enormous powers of concentration, Buffum could write songs (music and 
lyrics) during church services, in hotel lobbies, on trains, and in train stations, even 
while his four children climbed all over him. According to his daughter Lois, only 
one thing could throw off his concentration: singing another song. If no piano was 
available, Buffum would improvise on a table or another piece of furniture and tap 
out the song. He would even invite congregations to get into the act. First, he would 
have them suggest song titles. Writing the suggestions on a chalkboard, he would 
then have them vote on their top choice. Finally, he would compose a matching song 
on the spot.
In Huntington Beach, California, an eleven-year-old girl suggested the title 
“When I Take My Vacation in Heaven.” Although the congregation didn’t choose this 
one, Buffum was intrigued by it. By the next morning, he had composed the song.

[27] “When I Take My Vacation in Heaven.” Although the congregation didn’t choose this 
one, Buffum was intrigued by it. By the next morning, he had composed the song. 
Although he usually sold the rights to a song for fi  ve dollars—just enough for food 
and basic expenses—he sold this one for one hundred dollars; it became immensely 
popular, moving into the secular market.
The life and ministry of Herbert Buffum epitomizes the church’s troubadour, 
those who itinerated with the gospel in song. Their melodies and choruses not only 
enriched worship, they also infl  uenced day-to-day life, leaving a lyric in the heart that 
enabled the believer to maintain a walk of faith. Their legacy of music blessed gener-
ations of people in all walks of life in congregations around the world.
WILLIAM I. EVANS
(1887–1954)
“We looked to him as a champion of our movement in the things of the Spirit 
and of the old paths of Pentecost,” wrote Milton T. Wells on behalf of the faculty of

[28] WILLIAM I. EVANS
(1887–1954)
“We looked to him as a champion of our movement in the things of the Spirit 
and of the old paths of Pentecost,” wrote Milton T. Wells on behalf of the faculty of 
Eastern Bible Institute in Green Lane, Pennsylvania, after hearing of the death of “W. 
I.” Evans. “One of his greatest joys in the eternal world will be to see the stamp of 
the Spirit which under God he left upon so many thousands of lives either directly or 
indirectly.” Few have had a greater formative infl  uence on the Pentecostal spirituality 
of Assemblies of God ministers than “Brother Evans.”
Born in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, to devout Methodist parents, he came to 
Christ at age eleven while kneeling at his mother’s knee in the kitchen of their home. 
270
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[29] After his conversion, however, he became attracted to the 
Christian and Missionary Alliance. Called to the min-
istry, Evans enrolled at A. B. Simpson’s Missionary 
Training Institute in Nyack, New York, in 1906. The 
next year at the Alliance’s convention in Nyack, he 
and many others were baptized in the Spirit and 
spoke in tongues.
Like other Alliance Pentecostals who remained, 
he went on with his ministry of preaching. While pas-
toring in Richmond, Virginia, he also studied for three 
years at the University of Richmond. During this 
time, he met his wife, Hilda Mae Lindberg; 
they were married in 1914. In the same year, 
he left the Alliance due to its rejection of 
the doctrine of tongues as initial evidence. 
After pastoring the Ossining (New York) 
Gospel Assembly, he moved to Newark, 
New Jersey, where he joined the faculty of Bethel Bible Training School. Although 
the board of the independent Bethel Pentecostal Assembly in Newark sponsored the

[30] New Jersey, where he joined the faculty of Bethel Bible Training School. Although 
the board of the independent Bethel Pentecostal Assembly in Newark sponsored the 
school, many of its faculty members and students were members of the Assemblies of 
God. Evans served as principal in the last years of the school’s existence (1923–1929).
SPIRITUAL MENTORS
271
William I. Evans
Had I But One Hour to Live
W
hat in all the realm of life is worthy of attention except the personal constant pres-
ence of the Lord Jesus Christ! Only those things which contribute vitally toward 
seeking Him and discovering new beauties in Him are worth- while. If in this ﬂ  eeting 
ephemeral day called life, we can reach Him in a mighty grasp of faith that brings Him 
intimately near and makes Him supremely real, we have wrung from earthly walking 
the only thing worthy of attention.
To apprehend Him in faith’s close grip, to be apprehended by Him in love’s strong

[31] the only thing worthy of attention.
To apprehend Him in faith’s close grip, to be apprehended by Him in love’s strong 
grasp, to be constrained then in the embrace of His mighty anointing, urged by an 
unquenchable zeal, to rescue others from the night and present them complete in 
God’s salvation, this is the sum of life below.
The heart cries for adjustment to God and His will with a passion that blinds the 
eyes to all human standards and to every admirable achievement or apparent suc-
cess of our brethren. Nothing short of Christ Himself becomes the pattern, nothing less 
than all the fullness of God, abiding, pulsating, motivating, accomplishing, can stay 
the longing or still the crying. The soul chafes at every earthly bond and, awakened to 
a strength hitherto unrealized, presses out in quest of [the most intense] reality and 
highest, holiest, satisfying achievement.
—W. I. Evans, “Had I But One Hour to Live,” 
Pentecostal Evangel (April 26, 1941): 5.

[32] highest, holiest, satisfying achievement.
—W. I. Evans, “Had I But One Hour to Live,” 
Pentecostal Evangel (April 26, 1941): 5.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[33] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
272
The question and answer column for readers of Today’s Pentecostal Evangel ﬁ  rst 
appeared in the January 1, 1916 issue of the Weekly Evangel, during a time of doctrinal 
strife in the Assemblies of God over the correct understanding of the Godhead. Questions 
had to be sincere (“not for controversy”), brief, and about religious matters “that can be 
answered from the Bible and History.” Inquirers were told speciﬁ cally not to ask for the 
interpretation of dreams and visions since “we do not have the gift to interpret these.” 
E. N. Bell provided the answers until his death in 1923; Gospel Publishing House 
then made them available in book form as Questions and Answers. E. S. Williams later 
wrote the columns and his “Your Questions” appeared in 1968. Years later, the column 
resurfaced with Stanley Horton as the writer. It has been a popular means of providing 
spiritual advice for believers.

[34] When Bethel “merged” with CBI (that is, the Evans and Ralph M. Riggs families 
moved to Springfi  eld), he continued his training of Spirit-fi  lled young people. Evans 
is remembered for his life of prayer and keen insight into the moving of the Spirit, 
including the operation of the Spirit’s gifts in worship. 
One of his favorite illustrations, which he shared with freshmen, referred to a trip 
he had taken through Kansas. He had observed that the “wheat stalks yielded even 
to the slightest moving of the air. To him, this was a picture of what should be true 
in a Christian’s life. It should be yielded to God, and so sensitive to Him, that the 
slightest movement of the Spirit would be obeyed.” Evans himself modeled this life 
in the Spirit.
His daily schedule began early with extended prayer, Bible study, and meditation. 
Next, he went to his offi ce to pray with the faculty before the chapel service. He was

[35] in the Spirit.
His daily schedule began early with extended prayer, Bible study, and meditation. 
Next, he went to his offi ce to pray with the faculty before the chapel service. He was 
always there thirty minutes ahead of his colleagues and never looked up as they came 
into the room. However, he sensed that the spiritual atmosphere intensifi  ed as the 
number increased: “As each digit is added, the power is multiplied.”
Prepared now for the morning chapel, the faculty and Dean Evans took their seats 
on the platform. In leading the service, he encouraged times of prayer and “waiting 
before the Lord.” When revival came, he kept things moving in the right direction by 
urging the students to “hold steady.” One student said this “brought many a service 
of victory and blessing.” Hence, when problems arose, he was able to keep the Spirit 
from being “quenched” (1 Thessalonians 5:19, KJV). Evans also understood the mean-

[36] of victory and blessing.” Hence, when problems arose, he was able to keep the Spirit 
from being “quenched” (1 Thessalonians 5:19, KJV). Evans also understood the mean-
ing of “the joy of the Lord.” There were times of Pentecostal blessing when he would 
begin to “laugh in the Spirit.” Students recalled how the chapel reverberated with his 
hearty laugh. 
For W. I. Evans, affectionately known as “Pop” Evans, holiness and spirituality 
went hand in hand. Those who claim Spirit baptism but haven’t submitted their wills 
and ambitions to Christ will never have “a Holy Ghost ministry.” 
“You may have a spurt here and there,” he wrote, “like the shooting off of a fi  re-
cracker, or the detonating of a skyrocket, but it will fi  zzle out and come down with a 
thud. Holy Ghost ministry is by Christ’s Lordship.
RECOMMENDED READING
Argue, Zelma. Contending for the Faith. 2d rev. ed. Winnipeg: Messenger of God Publishing 
House, 1928.

[37] thud. Holy Ghost ministry is by Christ’s Lordship.
RECOMMENDED READING
Argue, Zelma. Contending for the Faith. 2d rev. ed. Winnipeg: Messenger of God Publishing 
House, 1928.
———. Garments of Strength. Springfi  eld, Mo.: Gospel Publishing House, 1935.
Blumhofer, Edith L. “Life on Faith Lines: Early Homes and Early Pentecostal Values.” Parts 1 
and 2. Assemblies of God Heritage 10 (summer 1990): 10–12, 22; 10 (fall 1990): 5–7, 21–22.
Craig, Marion. Prepared by God: Robert Cummings. Springfi  eld, Mo.: Foreign Missions 
Department, n.d.
Cummings, Robert W. Gethsemane. Springfi  eld, Mo.: By the author, 1944.
———. Unto You Is the Promise. Springfi  eld, Mo.: Gospel Publishing House, n.d.
SPIRITUAL MENTORS
273
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[38] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
Enloe, Tim. “Dr. Charles S. Price: His Life, Ministry and Infl uence.” Assemblies of God Heritage 28 
(2008): 4–13.
Evans, Paul A. Letters from “Pop” Evans. Springfi  eld, Mo.: Central Bible College Alumni Associa-
tion, 1973.
Evans, W. I. This River Must Flow! Springfi  eld, Mo.: Gospel Publishing House, 1954. 
Follette, John Wright. Arrows of Truth. Springfi  eld, Mo.: Gospel Publishing House, 1969. 
Gohr, Glenn. “Two Pioneers of Pentecost in Milwaukee: Joseph and Helen Wannenmacher.” 
 Assemblies of God Heritage 9 (spring 1989): 11–12, 20. 
Hammond, Hattie. “Christ Bringing Us to God.” Pentecostal Evangel (24 April 1937): 2–3.
Price, Charles S. The Real Faith. 1940. Reprint, Plainfi  eld, N.J.: Logos International, 1972.
———. The Story of My Life. Pasadena, Calif.: By the author, 1935.
Shearer, Sheryl. “Zelma E. Argue: Handmaiden of the Lord.” Assemblies of God Heritage 22 (spring 
2002): 18–23.

[39] ———. The Story of My Life. Pasadena, Calif.: By the author, 1935.
Shearer, Sheryl. “Zelma E. Argue: Handmaiden of the Lord.” Assemblies of God Heritage 22 (spring 
2002): 18–23.
St. John of the Cross. Dark Night of the Soul. New York: Doubleday, 1990.
Warner, Wayne E. “Herbert Buffum: The King of Gospel Song Writers.” Assemblies of God Heritage 
6 (fall 1986): 11–14, 16.
274
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:42:23 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
================================================================================

================================================================================
🧠 Query: User: hello
Assistant: Hello! My main purpose here is to answer information questions from the file base. If you have any questions about topics such as healing, the gospel, or the implications of life and death, feel free to ask!
User: tell me what I just asked you
Assistant: Sorry, we do not have enough information to answer your question. If you have any specific questions about topics such as healing, the gospel, or the implications of life and death, feel free to ask!
User: 16 fundamental truths
Assistant: The "16 Fundamental Truths" are a set of essential doctrines held by the Assemblies of God. They include:

1. **The Scriptures Inspired** - The Old and New Testaments are verbally inspired by God and serve as the authoritative rule of faith and conduct.
2. **The One True God** - God is revealed as the eternally self-existent "I AM," the Creator and Redeemer.
3. **The Deity of the Lord Jesus Christ** - Jesus is acknowledged as both God and man.
4. **The Fall of Man** - Man fell from grace through voluntary transgression, incurring physical and spiritual death.
5. **The Salvation of Man** - Redemption is through the shed blood of Jesus Christ.
6. **The Ordinances of the Church** - Includes baptism in water and Holy Communion.
7. **The Baptism in the Holy Spirit** - A distinct experience for believers, empowering them for service.
8. **The Initial Physical Evidence of the Baptism in the Holy Spirit** - Speaking in tongues as the initial sign.
9. **Sanctification** - An act of separation from evil and dedication to God.
10. **The Church and Its Mission** - The Church is the body of Christ with a mission to evangelize.
11. **The Ministry** - A divinely called ministry for evangelization, worship, and meeting human needs.
12. **Divine Healing** - Healing is part of the gospel and available to believers.
13. **The Blessed Hope** - The resurrection of believers and the return of Christ.
14. **The Millennial Reign of Christ** - Christ's return to reign on earth for a thousand years.
15. **The Final Judgment** - The wicked will be judged and face eternal punishment.
16. **The New Heavens and the New Earth** - A promise of a new creation where righteousness dwells.

These truths are intended to provide a basis for fellowship among believers ([1], [2], [3], [4], [5], [5]).

User: explain the first one
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
📄 Context Sent to Model:
[1] Hope;” Fundamental Truth 14, “The Millennial Reign of Christ;” Fundamental Truth 15, 
“The Final Judgment;” and Fundamental Truth 16, “The New Heavens and the New 
Earth.” The return of Jesus is one of the Assemblies of God’s four core doctr ines, 
alongside salvation, Spirit baptism, and divine healing. 
Our eschatology has been at the heart of our doctrinal beliefs since our founding in 
1914 when the preamble to the Cons titution and Bylaws declared, “ ‘Jesus is coming 
soon’ to this old world in the s ame manner as he left it to set up His millennial 
kingdom and to reign over the earth in righteousness and peace for a thousand 
years.”1 This belief in the nearness of Christ’s coming has motivated us as a 
Fellowship to prioritize evangelism and worldwide missions efforts and to challenge 
people to live committed to Christ.  
Different theological com munities hold v arious views on the millennial reign of

[2] 2 
Regardless of the disagreement among Christians, the Assemblies of God has 
maintained from its beginning that four eschatologic al events will occur  in a particular 
order according to the Scripture. The resurrec tion of the saints  will precede the 
millennial reign of Christ on the ear th, after which comes the final judgment, and only 
then will God bring about the new heavens and new earth. 
Historical Context 
Church leaders affirmed a premillennial reading of Scripture in the fir st centuries 
after Jesus’ ascension. Early Christian premillennial interpretation par alleled 
intertestamental interpretations, found in the books of E noch and Jubilees, of Old 
Testament prophecy predicting a messianic k ingdom. By the third centur y, there 
is evidence that more Christians chose an am illennial interpretation, possibly due to 
the loss of Jewish influence in the Church coupled with the rise of a Greek-i nspired

[3] is evidence that more Christians chose an am illennial interpretation, possibly due to 
the loss of Jewish influence in the Church coupled with the rise of a Greek-i nspired 
hermeneutic. With the rise of Christendom in the fourth century, mos t Christian 
leaders assumed an amillennial view. Some that held to the view that the millennium is 
symbolic of the Church Age still believed in a literal one thousand years between the 
ascension and return of Jesus, but that became impossible to believe after the 
eleventh century.  
Postmillennialism ros e in popularity after the Protestant Reformation. The ongoing 
church reform led to hope for the eventual reform of society  and a new age of church 
rule. This hope became associated with P rotestant revivalis m. Leaders of reviv al in 
the United States promoted postm illennialism. Proponents  of the postmillennial 
impulse often associated with reform mov ements such as abolitionism. B y the end

[4] the United States promoted postm illennialism. Proponents  of the postmillennial 
impulse often associated with reform mov ements such as abolitionism. B y the end 
of the nineteenth century, the Civil War and social problems from urbanization led 
many evangelicals to abandon the postmillennial view that the wor ld was getting 
better. Instead, they looked for the imminent r eturn of Christ to set up His millennial 
kingdom as the only hope for truly reforming the world.  
The Pentecostal Movement began when views of Christ’s coming were shifting 
from postmillennialism to prem illennialism. One of the most common refrains in 
early Pentecostalism was that “Jesus is coming soon.” The ex pectation that Jesus was 
coming “in the flesh” to establish His kingdom motivated Pentecostals to pr epare the 
world for the return of Jesus—t he answer to the world’s complex social, spiritual, and 
moral problems. 
When the Assemblies of God for med its doctrinal statement in 1916, it codified

[5] world for the return of Jesus—t he answer to the world’s complex social, spiritual, and 
moral problems. 
When the Assemblies of God for med its doctrinal statement in 1916, it codified 
its premillennial beliefs in four eschatological doctr ines. In particular, “The Bles sed 
Hope” affirmed: “The Resurrection of those who have fallen asleep in Christ, the 
rapture of believers which are alive and remain, and the translation of the true 
Church, this is the blessed hope set before all believers.” 2 The promise of Jesus’ return 
2 Minutes of the General Council of the Assemblies of God (October 1–7, 1916), 13.

[6] 3 
included the pr omise of the resur rection of the dead and the trans formation of the 
living into glor ified bodies. In affirming the r apture, or res urrection, of the Church, 
the Assemblies of God also affirm ed a belief in Christ’s literal r eturn to reign on 
earth for a thousand years. This view contradicts the views of postmillennialists  and 
amillennialists. Pentecostals rejected both pos itions because they minim ize the 
importance of Christ’s imminent bodily return to earth, as prom ised in the New 
Testament and affirmed by the Early Church.3 
Over the past century, the General Council r evised the Statement of Fundamental 
Truths several times, and eschatological doctrines receiv ed substantial revisions as 
certain situations demanded. 4 In 1927, the General Counc il r etitled and rewrote 
“Millennial Reign” to emphasize Israel’s role in J esus’ millennial kingdom  on earth 
when He comes. In 1961, the General Council revised “Millennial Reign”  again to

[7] “Millennial Reign” to emphasize Israel’s role in J esus’ millennial kingdom  on earth 
when He comes. In 1961, the General Council revised “Millennial Reign”  again to 
strengthen its emphasis on the literal millennial reign. 5 In each case, the Assemblies of 
God wanted to clarify our position on the coming of Christ to reign on earth. 
In addition to these revisions, the General Council passed resolutions that 
addressed various eschatological teachings that caused a distraction from  these core 
doctrines. In 1917, the General Council dis couraged ministers from setting dates for 
Christ’s return.6 In 1937, the General Council disapproved the teaching that Chr istians 
will go through a full seven-y ear tribulation because it denied the imminent return of 
Jesus.7 In 1961, the General Council responded to a growing number of minis ters 
holding to amillennial views by including a pr ohibition of teaching amillennialism. 8 In

[8] Jesus.7 In 1961, the General Council responded to a growing number of minis ters 
holding to amillennial views by including a pr ohibition of teaching amillennialism. 8 In 
2023, the General Council revised those bylaws  to emphasize the right to 
address other views for educational purposes, but that ministers should r efrain 
from “intentionally leading others astray” regarding the four core eschatologic al 
teachings of the Assemblies of God.  
The Statement of Fundamental Truths clearly affirms premillennial doctr ine, but it 
is important not to dogm atize other elements  of end-t ime beliefs that ar e not 
specifically addressed. These include details about the identity of the Antichrist (2 
Thessalonians 2:3; 2 John 7), the battle of Armageddon (Revelation 16:16), the m ark of 
the Beast (Revelation 13:16–17), and the Great Tribulation (Matthew 24:21; Revelation 
7:14). While ministers may hav e convictions about specific interpretations of

[9] the Beast (Revelation 13:16–17), and the Great Tribulation (Matthew 24:21; Revelation 
7:14). While ministers may hav e convictions about specific interpretations of 
these elements, they are sec ondary to the essential elements of our 
3 A survey of early Pentecostal denominations/fellowships shows that the belief in the premillennial return of Jesus 
was a widespread and significant belief of early Pentecostalism as a whole.  
4 The first was in 1920 when the seventeen truths were reordered to sixteen.  
5 Minutes of the General Council of the Assemblies of God (August 23–29, 1961), 23.  
6 Minutes of the General Council of the Assemblies of God (September 9–14, 1917), 17. 
7 Minutes of the General Council of the Assemblies of God (September 2–9, 1937), 46. 
8 Minutes of the General Council of the Assemblies of God (August 21–26, 1969), 81–82. It further notes, “We 
recommend that those ministers who embrace any of the foregoing eschatological errors refrain from preaching or

[10] recommend that those ministers who embrace any of the foregoing eschatological errors refrain from preaching or 
teaching them. Should they persist in emphasizing these doctrines to the point of making them an issue, their 
standing in the Fellowship will be seriously affected.”

[11] gifts, and healing without the universality of Spirit baptism 
and tongues. There is a real danger, in the words of Earl Creps, 
of a generation of Assemblies of God “post-Pentecostal Pen-
tecostals” that affi  rm the Statement of Fundamental Truths 
and enjoy relationships, but do not seek to practice or pro-
mote Spirit baptism and speaking in tongues.
General Superintendent Wood disputes this pessimistic 
picture in a 2014 centennial interview in Charisma magazine. 
His observations, interviews with leaders, and wide travel 
affi rm that Spirit baptism with the initial physical evidence of 
tongues is alive and growing. He affi  rmed that the statistics 
are imperfect, not refl  ecting practices in thousands of churches in recent years.
A recent Pew Research study evaluating both American and global Christianity 
notes a signifi cant rise in Pentecostal practices, even among those not tradition-
ally labeled Pentecostal or charismatic. For much the evangelical world in particular,

[12] notes a signifi cant rise in Pentecostal practices, even among those not tradition-
ally labeled Pentecostal or charismatic. For much the evangelical world in particular, 
praying for healing and miracles, exercising spiritual gifts, trusting the Lord for deliv-
erance, and speaking in tongues are all valid biblical practices. This is a signifi  cant 
change within one generation. 
Cessationism (the belief that the manifestations of the Spirit in 1 Corinthians 
12–14 ceased with the death of the original apostles or the close of the New Testa-
ment canon in the fourth century) is a declining movement as believers of all denom-
inations and theological persuasions affi  rm the contemporary work of the Spirit. 
Though many of these groups do not share the “classical” Pentecostal distinctive 
of tongues as the initial physical evident of Spirit baptism, the affi  rmation that the 
Spirit works in and through all the gifts is a heartening change.

[13] of tongues as the initial physical evident of Spirit baptism, the affi  rmation that the 
Spirit works in and through all the gifts is a heartening change. 
There are some signs across the United States that cause concern among 
thoughtful persons. The number of people that answered “none” when asked for reli-
gious affi  liation has grown from a miniscule percentage in the 1980s to 16.1  per-
cent in a 2007 poll by Pew Research. And 28 percent have left the faith they were 
raised in or affi  liate with no religion at all.
1 This refl  ects two trends: (1) the loss of 
denominational loyalty among some that might still (vaguely) identify themselves as 
Christians; and (2) an increasing number of the U.S. population (both immigrant and 
native-born) with no religious affi liation.  
“Post-Christian” and “postmodern” are labels tossed about with great frequency 
in popular analysis. The United States remains much more religious than most of

[14] “Post-Christian” and “postmodern” are labels tossed about with great frequency 
in popular analysis. The United States remains much more religious than most of 
Western Europe; however, “being spiritual and not religious” is gaining as a category 
of a generation without signifi  cant exposure to the gospel. 
The new challenge for Assemblies of God leaders is evangelization of people with 
no Christian memory. This is a new phenomenon for many U.S. leaders (though not 
for the appointed missionaries of AGWM). 
Another concern among thoughtful adherents is moral compromise with the 
subversion of traditional marriage and sexuality in the last half-century. The public 
TOWARD THE CENTENNIAL: TIMES OF TRANSFORMATION
525
Charisma magazine
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:52:40 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[15] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
consensus in the West and the United States of lifelong heterosexual marriage and 
celibacy for singles is no longer the prevailing opinion of popular culture or even 
a majority of people. While strong elements within American society advocate or 
support gay marriage, the Assemblies of God stands fi  rmly committed to scriptural 
teaching that marriage is between a man and a woman.
When confronted by actual or potential compromise in other evangelical or Pen-
tecostal fellowships and organizations, steadfast adherence to biblical marriage is 
quickly affi  rmed. The Assemblies of God leadership has been uncompromising it its 
standards of sexual conduct while affi  rming love for all people broken by sin. 
OPPORTUNITIES AHEAD!
The evangelical revivals of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries fueled the 
birth of global missions. The Pentecostal awakenings have accelerated the spread

[16] OPPORTUNITIES AHEAD!
The evangelical revivals of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries fueled the 
birth of global missions. The Pentecostal awakenings have accelerated the spread 
of the gospel in the twentieth century. We are now witnesses the re-evangelizing of 
Europe and the United States by missional believers from developing nations. The 
gospel is now going from everywhere to everywhere as former missions fi elds become 
missions-sending agencies. 
When Melvin Hodges penned The Indigenous Church in 1953, the aim of missions was 
a self-sustaining local church and, in the long-term, a self-sustaining national fellow-
ship. These remain important goals; however, a more complete goal is emerging in the 
twenty-fi rst century: establishing churches and fellowships of churches that become 
not only self-sustaining, but missionary sending. Fresh voices such as Ivan Satyavrata, 
Wonsuk and Julie Ma, DeLonn Rance, and others are helping AG adherents around

[17] not only self-sustaining, but missionary sending. Fresh voices such as Ivan Satyavrata, 
Wonsuk and Julie Ma, DeLonn Rance, and others are helping AG adherents around 
the world answer the Great Commission call and become “360  Churches.” Mission-
ary-scholars such as Alan Johnson in Thailand are now articulating an integration of 
apostolic pioneering and church planting united with holistic care for communities. 
In the post-Christian West, Pentecostal spirituality and theology are the answer 
for generations that are hungry for experience and meaning rooted in love and truth. 
Apologetics and careful explanations of truth must be united with the proclamation 
of the Cross and power of the Spirit to deliver, heal, forgive, redeem, and transform. 
Now is not the time to lessen Pentecostal emphases. The exact opposite is true. The 
signs and wonders demonstrated in Scripture are alive and well on the frontiers of

[18] Now is not the time to lessen Pentecostal emphases. The exact opposite is true. The 
signs and wonders demonstrated in Scripture are alive and well on the frontiers of 
evangelization and missions today. The Assemblies of God has a bright future as we 
recognize those frontiers across the street and around the world.
Gary McGee’s fi nal work, Miracles, Missions and American Pentecostalism (2010), details 
the supernatural confi rmation of the missionary pioneers. As a new Spirit-empowered 
generation hears the call to evangelism, worship, discipleship, and compassion, they 
can expect the Lord of the harvest to again confi  rm the message of grace.
ENDNOTE
 1 “Religious Landscape Survey, Report 1: Religious Affi  liation,” Pew Research Center’s 
Religion & Public Life Project, 2013, http://religions.pewforum.org/reports.
526
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:52:40 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[19] 527
T
he Bible is our all–suffi  cient rule for faith and practice. This Statement of Fun-
damental Truths is intended simply as a basis of fellowship among us (i.e., that 
we all speak the same thing, 1 Corinthians 1:10; Acts 2:42). The phraseology 
employed in this statement is not inspired or contended for, but the truth set forth 
is held to be essential to a full–gospel ministry. No claim is made that it contains all 
biblical truth, only that it covers our need as to these fundamental doctrines.
1. THE SCRIPTURES INSPIRED
The Scriptures, both the Old and New Testaments, are verbally inspired of God 
and are the revelation of God to man, the infallible, authoritative rule of faith and 
conduct (2 Timothy 3:15–17; 1 Thessalonians 2:13; 2 Peter 1:21).
2. THE ONE TRUE GOD
The one true God has revealed himself as the eternally self–existent “I AM,” the 
Creator of heaven and earth and the Redeemer of mankind. He has further revealed

[20] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
relationship, as to its mode is inscrutable and incomprehensible, because unexplained 
(Luke 1:35; 1 Corinthians 1:24; Matthew 11:25–27; 28:19; 2 Corinthians 13:14; 1 John 1:3,4).
(c) Unity of the One Being of Father, Son, and Holy Spirit
Accordingly, therefore, there is that in the Father which constitutes Him the Father 
and not the Son; there is that in the Son which constitutes Him the Son and not the 
Father; and there is that in the Holy Spirit which constitutes Him the Holy Spirit and 
not either the Father or the Son. Wherefore, the Father is the Begetter; the Son is the 
Begotten; and the Holy Spirit is the One proceeding from the Father and the Son. There-
fore, because these three persons in the godhead are in a state of unity, there is but 
one Lord God Almighty and His name one (John 1:18; 15:26; 17:11,21; Zechariah 14:9).
(d) Identity and Cooperation in the Godhead
The Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit are never identical as to person; nor

[21] (d) Identity and Cooperation in the Godhead
The Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit are never identical as to person; nor 
confused as to relation; nor divided in respect to the godhead; nor opposed as to 
cooperation. The Son is in the Father and the Father is in the Son as to relationship. 
The Son is with the Father and the Father is with the Son, as to fellowship. The Father 
is not from the Son, but the Son is from the Father, as to authority. The Holy Spirit 
is from the Father and the Son proceeding, as to nature, relationship, cooperation, 
and authority. Hence, no person in the godhead either exists or works separately or 
independently of the others (John 5:17–30,32,37; 8:17,18).
(e) The Title, Lord Jesus Christ
The appellation Lord Jesus Christ, is a proper name. It is never applied in the New 
Testament either to the Father or to the Holy Spirit. It therefore belongs exclusively 
to the Son of God (Romans 1:1–3,7; 2 John 3).
(f) The Lord Jesus Christ, God With Us

[22] Testament either to the Father or to the Holy Spirit. It therefore belongs exclusively 
to the Son of God (Romans 1:1–3,7; 2 John 3).
(f) The Lord Jesus Christ, God With Us
The Lord Jesus Christ, as to His divine and eternal nature, is the proper and only 
Begotten of the Father, but as to His human nature, He is the proper Son of Man. He 
is, therefore, acknowledged to be both God and man; who because He is God and 
man, is “Immanuel,” God with us (Matthew 1:23; 1 John 4:2,10,14; Revelation 1:13,17).
(g) The Title, Son of God
Since the name Immanuel embraces both God and man, in the one person, our 
Lord Jesus Christ, it follows that the title Son of God describes His proper deity, and 
the title Son of Man, His proper humanity. Therefore, the title Son of God belongs to 
the order of eternity, and the title Son of Man to the order of time (Matthew 1:21–23; 
2 John 3; 1 John 3:8; Hebrews 7:3; 1:1–13).
(h) Transgression of the Doctrine of Christ

[23] the order of eternity, and the title Son of Man to the order of time (Matthew 1:21–23; 
2 John 3; 1 John 3:8; Hebrews 7:3; 1:1–13).
(h) Transgression of the Doctrine of Christ
Wherefore, it is a transgression of the doctrine of Christ to say that Jesus Christ 
derived the title Son of God solely from the fact of the Incarnation, or because of His 
relation to the economy of redemption. Therefore, to deny that the Father is a real 
and eternal Father, and that the Son is a real and eternal Son, is a denial of the 
528
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:52:40 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[24] a. His virgin birth (Matthew 1:23; Luke 1:31,35). 
b. His sinless life (Hebrews 7:26; 1 Peter 2:22).
c. His miracles (Acts 2:22; 10:38).
d. His substitutionary work on the cross (1 Corinthians 15:3; 2 Corinthians 5:21).
e. His bodily resurrection from the dead (Matthew 28:6; Luke 24:39; 1 Corinthians 
15:4).
f. His exaltation to the right hand of God (Acts 1:9,11; 2:33; Philippians 2:9–11; 
Hebrews 1:3).
4. THE FALL OF MAN
Man was created good and upright; for God said, “Let us make man in our 
image, after our likeness.” However, man by voluntary transgression fell and thereby 
incurred not only physical death but also spiritual death, which is separation from 
God (Genesis 1:26,27; 2:17; 3:6; Romans 5:12–19).
5. THE SALVATION OF MAN
Man’s only hope of redemption is through the shed blood of Jesus Christ the Son 
of God.
APPENDIX 1: STATEMENT OF FUNDAMENTAL TRUTHS  
529

[25] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
530
a. Conditions to Salvation
Salvation is received through repentance toward God and faith toward the Lord 
Jesus Christ. By the washing of regeneration and renewing of the Holy Spirit, being 
justifi ed by grace through faith, man becomes an heir of God according to the hope of 
eternal life (Luke 24:47; John 3:3; Romans 10:13–15; Ephesians 2:8; Titus 2:11; 3:5–7).
b. The Evidences of Salvation
The inward evidence of salvation is the direct witness of the Spirit (Romans 8:16). 
The outward evidence to all men is a life of righteousness and true holiness (Ephe-
sians 4:24; Titus 2:12).
 6. THE ORDINANCES OF THE CHURCH
a. Baptism in Water
The ordinance of baptism by immersion is commanded in the Scriptures. All who 
repent and believe on Christ as Savior and Lord are to be baptized. Thus they declare 
to the world that they have died with Christ and that they also have been raised with

[26] repent and believe on Christ as Savior and Lord are to be baptized. Thus they declare 
to the world that they have died with Christ and that they also have been raised with 
Him to walk in newness of life (Matthew 28:19; Mark 16:16; Acts 10:47,48; Romans 6:4).
b. Holy Communion
The Lord’s Supper, consisting of the elements—bread and the fruit of the vine—is 
the symbol expressing our sharing the divine nature of our Lord Jesus Christ (2 Peter 
1:4); a memorial of His suffering and death (1 Corinthians 11:26); and a prophecy of His 
second coming (1 Corinthians 11:26); and is enjoined on all believers “till He come!”
7. THE BAPTISM IN THE HOLY SPIRIT
All believers are entitled to and should ardently expect and earnestly seek the 
promise of the Father, the baptism in the Holy Spirit and fi  re, according to the com-
mand of our Lord Jesus Christ. This was the normal experience of all in the early 
Christian church. With it comes the enduement of power for life and service, the

[27] mand of our Lord Jesus Christ. This was the normal experience of all in the early 
Christian church. With it comes the enduement of power for life and service, the 
bestowment of the gifts and their uses in the work of the ministry (Luke 24:49; Acts 
1:4,8; 1 Corinthians 12:1–31). This experience is distinct from and subsequent to the 
experience of the new birth (Acts 8:12–17; 10:44–46; 11:14–16; 15:7–9). With the bap-
tism in the Holy Spirit come such experiences as an overfl  owing fullness of the Spirit 
(John 7:37–39; Acts 4:8), a deepened reverence for God (Acts 2:43; Hebrews 12:28), an 
intensifi ed consecration to God and dedication to His work (Acts 2:42), and a more 
active love for Christ, for His Word, and for the lost (Mark 16:20).
8. THE INITIAL PHYSICAL EVIDENCE OF THE BAPTISM IN THE HOLY SPIRIT
The baptism of believers in the Holy Spirit is witnessed by the initial physical 
sign of speaking with other tongues as the Spirit of God gives them utterance (Acts

[28] The baptism of believers in the Holy Spirit is witnessed by the initial physical 
sign of speaking with other tongues as the Spirit of God gives them utterance (Acts 
2:4). The speaking in tongues in this instance is the same in essence as the gift of 
tongues (1 Corinthians 12:4–10,28), but different in purpose and use.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:52:40 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[29] APPENDIX 1: STATEMENT OF FUNDAMENTAL TRUTHS  
531
9. SANCTIFICATION
Sanctifi cation is an act of separation from that which is evil, and of dedication 
unto God (Romans 12:1,2; 1 Thessalonians 5:23; Hebrews 13:12). Scriptures teach a 
life of “holiness without which no man shall see the Lord” (Hebrews 12:14). By the 
power of the Holy Spirit we are able to obey the command: “Be ye holy, for I am holy” 
(1 Peter 1:15,16).
Sanctifi cation is realized in the believer by recognizing his identifi  cation with 
Christ in His death and resurrection, and by faith reckoning daily upon the fact of that 
union, and by offering every faculty continually to the dominion of the Holy Spirit 
(Romans 6:1–11,13; 8:1,2,13; Galatians 2:20; Philippians 2:12,13; 1 Peter 1:5).
10. THE CHURCH AND ITS MISSION
The Church is the body of Christ, the habitation of God through the Spirit, with 
divine appointments for the fulfi  llment of her Great Commission. Each believer, born

[30] PEOPLE OF THE SPIRIT
532
11. THE MINISTRY
A divinely called and scripturally ordained ministry has been provided by our Lord 
for the fourfold purpose of leading the Church in: (1) evangelization of the world (Mark 
16:15–20), (2) worship of God (John 4:23,24), (3) building a Body of saints being per-
fected in the image of His Son (Ephesians 4:11,16), and (4) meeting human need with 
ministries of love and compassion (Psalm 112:9; Galatians 2:10; 6:10; James 1:27).
12. DIVINE HEALING
Divine healing is an integral part of the gospel. Deliverance from sickness is pro-
vided for in the Atonement, and is the privilege of all believers (Isaiah 53:4,5; Mat-
thew 8:16,17; James 5:14–16).
13. THE BLESSED HOPE
The resurrection of those who have fallen asleep in Christ and their translation 
together with those who are alive and remain unto the coming of the Lord is the 
imminent and blessed hope of the Church (1 Thessalonians 4:16,17; Romans 8:23; 
Titus 2:13; 1 Corinthians 15:51,52).

[31] together with those who are alive and remain unto the coming of the Lord is the 
imminent and blessed hope of the Church (1 Thessalonians 4:16,17; Romans 8:23; 
Titus 2:13; 1 Corinthians 15:51,52).
14. THE MILLENNIAL REIGN OF CHRIST
The second coming of Christ includes the rapture of the saints, which is our 
blessed hope, followed by the visible return of Christ with His saints to reign on 
the earth for one thousand years (Zechariah 14:5; Matthew 24:27,30; Revelation 1:7; 
19:11–14; 20:1–6). This millennial reign will bring the salvation of national Israel (Eze-
kiel 37:21,22; Zephaniah 3:19,20; Romans 11:26,27) and the establishment of univer-
sal peace (Isaiah 11:6–9; Psalm 72:3–8; Micah 4:3,4).
15. THE FINAL JUDGMENT
There will be a fi  nal judgment in which the wicked dead will be raised and judged 
according to their works. Whosoever is not found written in the Book of Life, together 
with the devil and his angels, the beast and the false prophet, will be consigned to

[32] according to their works. Whosoever is not found written in the Book of Life, together 
with the devil and his angels, the beast and the false prophet, will be consigned to 
everlasting punishment in the lake which burneth with fi  re and brimstone, which is 
the second death (Matthew 25:46; Mark 9:43–48; Revelation 19:20; 20:11–15; 21:8).
16. THE NEW HEAVENS AND THE NEW EARTH
“We, according to His promise, look for new heavens and a new earth, wherein 
dwelleth righteousness” (2 Peter 3:13; Revelation 21,22).
Scripture quotations are from the King James Version of the Holy Bible.
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:52:40 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

[33] 533
1.  HOT SPRINGS, ARKANSAS 
APRIL 2–12, 1914
Chairman: E. N. Bell 
Secretary: J. Roswell Flower
2.  CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOVEMBER 15–29, 1914
Chairman: Arch P . Collins 
Assistant Chairman: Daniel C. O. 
Opperman 
Secretary: J. Roswell Flower
Assistant Secretary: Bennett F. Lawrence
3.  ST. LOUIS, MISSOURI
OCTOBER 1–10, 1915
Chairman: John W. Welch 
Secretary: J. Roswell Flower
4.  ST. LOUIS, MISSOURI
OCTOBER 1–7, 1916
Chairman: John W. Welch 
Secretary: Stanley H. Frodsham
5.  ST. LOUIS, MISSOURI
SEPTEMBER 9–14, 1917
Chairman: John W. Welch 
Secretary: Stanley H. Frodsham
6.  SPRINGFIELD, MISSOURI
SEPTEMBER 4–11, 1918
Chairman: John W. Welch 
Secretary: Stanley H. Frodsham
7.  CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
SEPTEMBER 25–30, 1919
Chairman: John W. Welch 
Secretary and Editor: E. N. Bell
Foreign Missions Secretary: 
J. Roswell Flower
8.  SPRINGFIELD, MISSOURI
SEPTEMBER 21–27, 1920
Chairman: E. N. Bell 
Secretary: John W. Welch 
Foreign Missions Secretary: 
J. Roswell Flower
Editor: John T. Boddy

[34] J. Roswell Flower
8.  SPRINGFIELD, MISSOURI
SEPTEMBER 21–27, 1920
Chairman: E. N. Bell 
Secretary: John W. Welch 
Foreign Missions Secretary: 
J. Roswell Flower
Editor: John T. Boddy
9.  ST. LOUIS, MISSOURI
SEPTEMBER 21–28, 1921
Chairman: E. N. Bell 
Secretary: John W. Welch
Foreign Missions Secretary: 
J. Roswell Flower
Editor: Stanley H. Frodsham
APPENDIX 2 
OFFICERS OF 
THE GENERAL COUNCIL
1914–2013
 EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 10/9/2025 5:52:40 PM UTC via PATHWAY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.
================================================================================

================================================================================
🧠 Query: who are you
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
📄 Context Sent to Model:
[1] 3 
 
occasion, and (4) the validation of prophetic authenticity through inspired utterance that 
was true to the Scriptures, apostolic teaching, and the revelation of Jesus. 
 
 
 
The Gift of Prophecy 
 
The key biblical teaching regarding the gift of prophecy is found in 1 Corinthians 12–14. 
Paul wrote that all believers may prophesy (1 Corinthians 14:31). He also  made it clear 
that not every believer will be a prophet or be regularly used by the Spirit in that way 
(1 Corinthians 12:28–29). This is implied by naming prophecy as a separate gift of the 
Spirit. At the same time, Paul encouraged all believers to “desire . . . especially prophecy” 
(1 Corinthians 14:1), for the person who prophesies does so for the “strengthening, 
encouraging and comfort” (1 Corinthians 14:3) of others. There is no statute of limitations 
on the spirit of prophecy in the life of the Church. 
 
The Church needs the prophetic function to strengthen, encourage, and comfort

[2] on the spirit of prophecy in the life of the Church. 
 
The Church needs the prophetic function to strengthen, encourage, and comfort 
believers. A word of prophecy can warn,  correct, predict, confirm , and console. Proper 
prophetic functioning remains crucial to today’s churches’ development, health, and well-
being. As a spiritual gift, prophecy’s primary outcome is building up the body of Christ. 
 
When people function in the prophetic, they must magnify the Lord, not themselves. They 
must not contradict the Bible. There are numerous ways to deliver a prophetic message. 
Those who serve in the prophetic should seek God for the proper method, timing, approach, 
tone, place, and audience. Much prophetic work is informal and not done in a formulaic 
way (as in “thus saith the Lord”). We all need to ask for ears to hear what God is speaking 
in all situations. Further, a person may receive a prophetic insight not to be shared as a

[3] way (as in “thus saith the Lord”). We all need to ask for ears to hear what God is speaking 
in all situations. Further, a person may receive a prophetic insight not to be shared as a 
message but to be prayed for as a concern. Prophesying people must be praying people. 
 
A word of prophecy should be given as a message in context with a limited scope. No 
prophecies today carry the authority or weight of Scripture. The context for a prophetic 
word in 1 Corinthians 14 is the local congregation where the person speaking is bet ter 
known and more accountable to the congregation. No prophetic word can be given that 
is insulated from the discernment or judgment of a community of believers who also have 
the Spirit of God. No prophet can hide behind titles like “man of God” or “woman of God” 
when they speak to other Spirit-filled women and men of God.  
 
Judging Prophecies 
 
Paul called churches to weigh or judge prophecy carefully (1 Corinthians 14:29). Such

[4] when they speak to other Spirit-filled women and men of God.  
 
Judging Prophecies 
 
Paul called churches to weigh or judge prophecy carefully (1 Corinthians 14:29). Such 
judgment should begin with recognizing that the completion of the New Testament does 
not invalidate the ongoing need for prophecy as a spiritual gift for the Church. Despite the 
assertions of cessationists, p rophecy d id not end because the New Testament was 
completed. One reason they condemned spontaneous  prophecy was the belief that it  
adds authoritative words to Scripture, thus cheapening the authority of Scripture overall.

[5] 4 
 
Pentecostals responded to this charge by highlighting the authority of Scripture in judging 
spontaneous prophecy. 2 They held to Paul’s guidelines for exercising prophecy  and 
judged the message against the whole of Scripture so that no prophecy contradicting the 
Bible was accepted. Pentecostals also limited the value of prophetic words to the 
particular context or community they are given rather than treating them as having 
authority over the whole C hurch. With these restrictions in practice and the presence of 
signs and wonders  accompanying the spread of the gospel , more evangelicals have 
accepted the possibility of modern- day prophecy.  Today, cessationism has few er 
adherents than it did during the early years of Pentecostalism.  
 
Scripture indicates how we should judge prophecy. Within the church, prophets speak for 
the edification of the community (1 Corinthians 14:26). While a prophetic word, lik e

[6] Scripture indicates how we should judge prophecy. Within the church, prophets speak for 
the edification of the community (1 Corinthians 14:26). While a prophetic word, lik e 
Scripture, may be given to rebuke, correct, and encourage (2 Timothy 3:16 through 4:2), it 
should be given for the good of the church. A prophet’s message should not be self-serving. 
 
A prophetic word should also be exercised in an orderly manner and not cause 
unnecessary confusion. People may reject a prophetic word, but the reason for confusion 
or controversy should not be careless behavior by the speaker. No one giving a prophetic 
word should act as if they cannot control themselves because prophets must know when 
and how to sit down and be silent for the good of the community (1 Corinthians 14:29–33). 
 
A prophetic word must also be true. Prophecies may not all be predictive but will be 
informative. Every prophecy inspired by the Holy Spirit will be for the glory and truth of

[7] A prophetic word must also be true. Prophecies may not all be predictive but will be 
informative. Every prophecy inspired by the Holy Spirit will be for the glory and truth of 
Jesus (John 16:14; 1 Corinthians 12:3; 1 John 4:2– 3). Any prophecy which dishonors or 
disregards the authority of Jesus cannot be from God. Any prophecy that contradicts the 
clear teaching of Scripture cannot be from God. No prophecy of the Spirit can contradict 
the Spirit who inspired Scripture. 
 
If a word of prophecy is predictive, we must be cautious and vigilant in assessing it. Some 
might deliver prophetic words that offer predictions of things with a fifty-fifty probability. 
Others may wrongly prophesy based on what can already be known. We must carefully  
distinguish between a prophetic word and a “good guess.” If a prophetic word offer s a 
prediction so general that it cannot be discerned as invalid or false  no matter what

[8] distinguish between a prophetic word and a “good guess.” If a prophetic word offer s a 
prediction so general that it cannot be discerned as invalid or false  no matter what 
happens, we should not count that as a predictive prophecy that has come true. 
 
Some predictive prophecies might be conditional and are given to generate a response 
rather than merely predict. Ninevites received a message of judgment, but their 
repentance led God to relent (Jonah 3:10). Hezekiah received a message about his 
impending death, but his cries to God led to a promise of healing (2 Kings 20:1–5). If the 
prophecy of soon- coming events does not come true and i s not conditioned on the 
response of the recipients, then the prophecy is false. If the prophecy leads to a turning 
toward God and does not come true, it may still reflect the will of God in being given. 
 
Prophecies must be judged according to:

[9] toward God and does not come true, it may still reflect the will of God in being given. 
 
Prophecies must be judged according to: 
 
2 Cecil M. Robeck, Jr., “Prophesy, Prophesying,” in Dictionary of Paul and His Letters (InterVarsity Press, 1993), 761–762.

[10] humbly and sacrificially. They often charge for their ministry services and make 
demands of people, lording it over others. Instead of magnifying Jesus, they focus 
on their notoriety. 
  
Jesus warned of false prophets who looked innocent but were inwardly  like wolves. We 
can tell the difference between true and false prophets by the fruit of the Spirit they exhibit 
(Matthew 7:15–20). False prophets usually work independently, expanding their empire 
without proper local church covering. Rather than appreciating checks and balances, they 
often reject teaching and correction . Many appeal to people’s itching ears and tell them 
what they want to hear. They expand their reach and control beyond God’s authorization.

[11] 6 
 
 
However, we should not allow a fear of false prophets  to dissuade us from recognizing 
the value of prophecy as an ongoing gift of the Holy Spirit, broadly distributed throughout 
a responsive Church  until Jesus comes. The Spirit sovereignly chooses and directs 
persons open and sensitive to His gifts and promptings and endows them variously with 
verbal gifts. Both men and women may expect to exercise the gift of prophecy in vari ed 
ways, as seen in the New Testament, to the glory of Jesus and the good of the Church.
================================================================================

